CITY CO.UNC.IL
AGENDA
(available also at www.citywindsor.ca)

Monday, February 6, 2017
6:00 o’clock p.m.
Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, Windsor City Hall
Members:

Mayor Drew Dilkens
Ward 1 - Councillor Fred Francis
Ward 2 - Councillor John Elliott
Ward 3 - Councillor Rino Bortolin
Ward 4 - Councillor Chris Holt
Ward 5 - Councillor Ed Sleiman
Ward 6 - Councillor Jo-Anne Gignac
Ward 7 - Councillor Irek Kusmierczyk
Ward 8 - Councillor Bill Marra
Ward 9 - Councillor Hilary Payne
Ward 10 - Councillor Paul Borrelli

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 1 of 129

C i ty C o u nci l
Monday, February 06, 2017

Page |2

1.
1.1.

ORDER OF BUSINESS
In the event of the absence of the Mayor, Councillor Francis has been Appointed
Acting Mayor for the month of February, 2017 in accordance with By-law 189-2014

2.

CALL TO ORDER - Playing of the National Anthem & Moment of Silent Reflection

3.

DISCLOSURE OF PECUNIARY INTEREST AND THE GENERAL NATURE
THEREOF

4.

ADOPTION OF THE MINUTES

5.

NOTICE OF PROCLAMATIONS
Heart Month – February 2017
Eating Disorder Awareness Week – February 1-7, 2017
Congenital Heart Defects Awareness Week – February 7-14, 2017
Rotary International World Peace & Understanding Week – February 19-25, 2017

6.

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

7.

COMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION PACKAGE

7.1.

CORRESPONDENCE
COMMUNICATION REPORTS

7.2.

2016 Municipal Accomplishments Report - City Wide (S 8/2017)

7.3.

Response to CQ34-2016: Design Guidelines for fencing along Riverside Drive
(CM 59/2016)

7.4.

CQ23-2016 - Use of Aerial Drones in Parks, City Wide (CM 6/2017)

7.5.

City Wide 2017 BIA Budget Review and Approval Process (CM 7/2017)

7.6.

CR629/2016 - George Avenue and Ypres Avenue Petition - Ward 5 (C 10/2017)

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 2 of 129

C i ty C o u nci l
Monday, February 06, 2017

Page |3

8.

CONSENT AGENDA

8.1.

2016 Cold Milling & Asphalt Paving II - Tender No. 145-16 (C 9/2017)

8.2.

Sanitary Trunk Sewer Inspection - RFP 151-16 (C 13/2017)
CONSENT COMMITTEE REPORTS

8.3.

Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment - Filing the Notice of Study
Completion - Ward 9 - quick turnaround request from City Engineer (S 4/2017)

9.

REQUEST FOR DEFERRALS, REFERRALS AND/OR WITHDRAWALS

10.

PRESENTATIONS AND DELEGATIONS (5 Minute maximum per delegate)

11.

REGULAR BUSINESS ITEMS (Non-Consent Items)

11.1.

Proposed Expropriation of Land for the Phase I, Cabana/Division Corridor
Improvements Project, City Wide (C 12/2017)

11.2.

Roseland Golf & Curling Club Limited - Annual General Meeting, City Wide
(C 15/2017)

11.3.

Canada 150 & Ontario 150 Grant Responses (C 1/2017)

12.

CONSIDERATION OF COMMITEE REPORTS

12.1.

(i) Report of the Special In-Camera meeting or other Committee as may be held prior
to Council (if scheduled)

13.

BY-LAWS (First and Second Reading)

14.

MOVE BACK INTO FORMAL SESSION

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 3 of 129

C i ty C o u nci l
Monday, February 06, 2017

Page |4

15.

NOTICES OF MOTION

16.

THIRD AND FINAL READING OF THE BY-LAWS

17.

PETITIONS

18.

QUESTION PERIOD

19.

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS

20.

UPCOMING MEETINGS
Planning, Heritage & Economic Development Standing Committee
Monday, February 13, 2017
4:30 o’clock p.m.
Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, Windsor City Hall
Housing Advisory Committee
Tuesday, February 14, 2017
9:00 o’clock a.m.
Board Room, 1266 McDougall Street
Windsor Public Library Board Meeting
Tuesday, February 14, 2017
4:00 o’clock p.m.
Central Library Board Room, 850 Ouellette Avenue
Diversity Committee
Thursday, February 16, 2017
4:30 o’clock p.m.
400 City Hall Square East, Room 407

21.

ADJOURNMENT

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 4 of 129

Item No. 7.2
CAO Office
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: S 8/2017
Author’s Contact:
Andrew Drouillard
Corporate Initiatives Analyst (A)
519-255-6100 ext. 6616
adrouillard@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/9/2017
Date to Council: 2/06/2017
Clerk’s File #: AS2017

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: 2016 Municipal Accomplishments Report - City Wide

RECOMMENDATION:
THAT the 2016 Municipal Accomplishments Report regarding the accomplishments of
City staff and departments in the 2016 calendar year and surrounding time frame, as
directed by the Mayor and City Council, BE RECEIVED for information.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
Through this report the Chief Administrative Officer would like to highlight the initiatives
and accomplishments of the last year.

DISCUSSION:
It would be very difficult to capture all of the annual accomplishments by City staff and
departments in a single list, as staff dedicate every day of the year to providing
exceptional service to the community. Instead, the Municipal Accomplishments Report,
attached in Appendix A, is intended to communicate to City Council and the public the
highlights of what City Administration has accomplished over the past year under City
Council’s direction and with their support. As well, this report on accomplishments can
Page 1 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 5 of 129

be useful as background information to help guide the development of future initiatives
and overall direction of the municipality.
The attached appendix features a summary of individual employee and corporate
awards and achievements, an overview of the work of internal programs and
committees, and a sample of the achievements from individual departments. The list of
departmental achievements is not meant to compare different areas or be
comprehensive in scope, but to showcase some of the important work done by
Administration in 2016. Many of the accomplishments listed span multiple departments,
especially those involving internal support services.
This year’s Report also features an updated format and an additional section which
briefly highlights three important projects that align with the three themes in the 20-Year
Strategic Vision.

RISK ANALYSIS:
N/A

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
N/A

CONSULTATIONS:
City of Windsor Management Staff

CONCLUSION:
The Corporation of the City of Windsor has achieved notable successes over the last
year in its delivery of services to the community. Highlights of these successes are
presented in the attached appendix. These successes are attributable to the policy
direction set by the mayor and council and the dedication of our valued employees in
acting on those directives.

Page 2 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 6 of 129

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:
Appendix A – 2016 Municipal Accomplishments Report

Page 3 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 7 of 129

2016
MUNICIPAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS REPORT

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 8 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Introduction
The Municipal Accomplishments Report is an annual report that aims to communicate and celebrate the
achievements of City of Windsor employees. City staff are dedicated to the betterment of the community and
work hard to implement the vision of the Mayor and City Council. Though some of accomplishments listed
have been recognized through other channels, this report provides an opportunity to enhance awareness of
administration’s efforts each year as a whole and to highlight some of the City’s most notable achievements.

City of Windsor Employee Awards
On Wednesday, November 9, 2016, City of Windsor employees celebrated the achievements and
contributions of their colleagues at a dinner and awards ceremony. Representatives of City Council and the
Corporate Leadership Team, along with the CAO, took the opportunity to appreciate the great work being
done by City staff and recognized the following 2016 award winners:
Frances Horvath Memorial Equal Opportunity Award
Frances Horvath, a former employee of the City of Windsor, was dedicated to improving the status of women
in the workforce. City Council has endorsed this award to be presented annually to the employee who best
demonstrates commitment to and promotion of equal opportunity, diversity and social justice.
Barbara Matis
As a Housing Support Caseworker, Barb always goes the extra mile and ensures that each person she serves is
treated with dignity and respect. She goes out of her way to provide the best customer service and seeks out
all available resources within the community to ensure that each person in her caseload has the best chance
at success. She always has a very positive attitude even when dealing with very challenging cases and does
not hesitate to work through her breaks and lunches to ensure that her client’s needs are met.
Barb’s extensive volunteer repertoire with numerous community organizations allows her to give back to the
community and create opportunities for children and families to experience things that might otherwise be
out of reach for them due to economic barriers. She truly cares about people and making connections and
always puts everyone else’s needs above her own. Barb is always willing to lend a hand to help, an ear to
listen, a heart to spread love and dedication that is immeasurable.
Mentor of the Year Award
Awarded to an individual who has fully embraced his/her role as a mentor and, through demonstrated efforts,
impacted the protégé in a positive, life-altering way.
Diane Quinn
Diane is the City of Windsor’s Manager of Employment & Training Initiatives. She was nominated for the
Mentor of the Year Award by her protégé, John Trpeski. In John’s words, “Diane as a mentor has opened my
eyes to a wide variety of new experiences and strategies that will help me to grow. Diane has a positive
disposition and is always advocating for betterment of all those around her.”

1
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 9 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Protégé of the Year Award
Awarded to an individual who, through his/her values and attitudes, exceeded the mentor’s expectations in
efforts of personal or professional growth and/or attainment of goals.
Tam Nguyen
Tam is the City of Windsor’s Coordinator of Recreation Systems. He was nominated for the Protégé of the
Year Award by his mentor, Peter Evans. In Peter’s words, “Tam is always the first to make suggestions for
improvements and offer solutions for efficiencies. He has transitioned from protégé to a peer and a corporate
leader for technology and service solution.”
Exceptional Customer Service Award (Individual)
Acknowledges individuals who have demonstrated outstanding customer service excellence over the past year.
Denise Ethier
Sitting at the receptionist window at 350 City Hall Square, Denise always has a smile on her face and is
prepared to greet everyone who crosses her path in a delightful manner. She has an amazing grasp of
departmental/corporate knowledge and always knows exactly who to direct a client to if she does not know a
specific answer. Denise goes the extra mile every day, not thinking twice to go around her desk and out into
the Lobby to point someone in the right direction if they are unsure of where to go. Denise’s professionalism
is truly exceptional and valued by colleagues as well as visitors and callers to the City of Windsor.
Julie Bradbury
Julie is an Ontario Works Float Caseworker at the Leamington satellite office, where she is required to
understand and apply legislation to general, youth, Ontario Disability and newcomer caseloads. This is a huge
and extremely varied volume of work but you will never hear Julie complain! As a caseworker, Julie shows
compassion and resourcefulness to her clients and applies policies in a fair and consistent manner. Julie’s
strong work ethic, positive approach to case management and collaborative support directly contributes to
the many successes of the Leamington satellite office.
Lori Martin
Lori was one of the original Operators who helped launch the 311 service back in 2005 and took on the added
responsibilities of answering 211 calls in 2007. She goes the extra mile with her callers, especially those most
vulnerable, and treats them with dignity and respect. Lori provides exceptional customer service every single
day and has received several calls or letters of thanks from her callers. As a 311/211 Operator, Lori is often
the first and only person a resident interacts with when they need City services and she represents the
Corporation incredibly well.

2
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 10 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Exceptional Customer Service Award (Team)
Acknowledges teams which have demonstrated outstanding customer service excellence over the past year.
Risk Management Division
The Risk Management Division delivers exceptional customer service on an ongoing basis to both internal and
external customers. They offer their expertise and support to all departments in an ongoing commitment to
corporate teamwork. This team also receives complaints and claims from residents on a daily basis. They are
professional and fair in every claim they handle and treat each one that comes their way with the same level
of fairness and respect. This group is committed to professionalism and integrity and this is evident in every
customer interaction.
Exceptional Customer Service (Rookie of the Year)
Recognizes and distinguishes a new employee who has shown outstanding customer service performance in
his/her current position (has been with the corporation for less than 2 years).
Enrique Silveyra
Enrique started in the Building Department in April of 2016 and was quick to make a great impression. He
continuously goes the extra mile to ensure customers leave with all of their questions answered. This does
not come from obligation, but from his genuinely good and gracious character. He is friendly, conscientious
and proactively reaches out to learn and understand his customers’ needs and concerns. Enrique is a
hardworking, top performing customer service professional, who is valued by the Building Department and is
very deserving of this award and recognition.
Pride in the Workplace Award
Acknowledges individuals who have demonstrated long term pride in and commitment to the quality of their
work.
Alena Sleziak
Alena is the Manager of the 311/211 Call Centre and has demonstrated a long term and consistent dedication
to being a kind and courteous professional who offers not only exemplary customer service but is also a
positive role model. Alena is the type of Manager that everyone hopes to have one day – she cares about her
staff, treats them with respect and is a kind, optimistic leader who empowers all around to excel. She gives
credit where credit is due and fosters positive relationships through her position and in her mentoring roles.
Domenic Marsella
Domenic began his career with the City in 1994 as an RPN with Huron Lodge and in 2004 moved to the Human
Resources department, first in the position of Employee Wellness Assistant, then as a Workplace Injury
Advisor and is now in the role of a Disability Management Specialist. Domenic is compassionate and caring to
the employees he works with and is committed to finding assistance for employees. He is famous for his
positivity and genuine interest in employees as people. As he has demonstrated over his 22 year career with
the City, Domenic is truly one of those rare individuals that combine a passion for his work and loyalty and
commitment to the Corporation with a true sense of compassion and caring for the people he works with.

3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 11 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
CAO’s Awards of Excellence
Onorio Colucci, Chief Administrative Officer, selected award recipients in three categories for 2016.
Community Spirit Award
Windsor Fire & Rescue Services
The Community Spirit Award recognizes the outstanding efforts of the team at Windsor Fire & Rescue in
making positive contributions in our city. Their efforts include, but are not limited to: the Wake Up Windsor
program involving door-to-door visits promoting smoke alarm use, the CO Alarm program offering carbon
monoxide alarms at discounted prices, the Hot Summer Nights community outreach initiative, Sparky’s Toy
Drive benefiting so many local young people, the WPFFA Benefit Fund supporting community members in
need, Holiday Lights Decorating at Huron Lodge to brighten up the facility for both residents and visitors, and
participation in the student Co-op Program promoting careers in the Fire Service. These initiatives
demonstrate the commitment of our team in Fire & Rescue to promote fire safety within our city with great
pride. These group efforts also demonstrate undeniable community spirit.
Going Above and Beyond the Call Award
Environmental Services Division
In late September, our area was hit by a severe weather event with rainfall that caused flooding in the homes
of many residents. The Province recognized the severity of the event and activated the Disaster Recovery
Assistance for Ontarians program. This extraordinary rainfall and resulting destruction required extraordinary
efforts by our City’s crew in Environmental Services. 1,900 calls about flooding were received by 311
operators by day 2 of the event, with nearly 1,000 more calls coming in after that. City Administration had all
hands on deck with staff assisting from Operations, Forestry, 311, and Communications. Many of our
employees pitched in extra effort during this time. In particular, the team in Environmental Services led the
collection of flood damaged materials through regular curbside and special pick-ups in the weeks that
followed, going well above and beyond the call of duty.
Care and Compassion Award
Sean Muir
On a cold night last January, Bus Driver, Sean Muir, noticed a young child running around Ouellette Avenue.
The child was only about four years old – and alone. Despite it being winter, the child was not wearing a coat
or shoes. Sean managed to catch up with the child and secure a safe, warm place on the bus until Windsor
Police arrived. What amazed Sean most was the number of vehicles that passed by during this situation.
None of them stopped. Sean’s keen observation skills and his quick actions clearly demonstrate his sincere
care and compassion for others.

4
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 12 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Marilyn Raffoul
Marilyn Raffoul didn’t expect to put her First Aid and CPR training to use during a routine drive into work last
January. However, that’s exactly what happened. Marilyn came upon a stopped car in the live lanes of the
highway. Inside was an unresponsive male driver. Marilyn quickly took control of the situation and provided
CPR to the gentleman in need. We don’t know how many other vehicles passed by without getting involved.
But Marilyn courageously leaped into service, applying the skills she’d learned through the City’s corporate
training program. For her efforts, Marilyn received an Ontario Provincial Police Commissioner’s Citation for
Lifesaving and was further nominated by the O.P.P. for an award from St. John Ambulance. Clearly, care and
compassion translated into lifesaving efforts that day.
Nikki LeBlanc, Justin Arnold and Jasmine Vido
The City’s recreation facilities are enjoyed by many residents and visitors every day. Many of these visitors are
children. On September 12th, staff noticed a child attending an after-school program at Oakwood Community
Centre having an allergic reaction. Jasmine Vido contacted the child’s mother by phone. With careful
monitoring, it was determined the reaction was getting worse. A second call to the parent prompted an
instruction to staff to administer the child’s epi-pen. When the ambulance arrived, Nikki LeBlanc and Justin
Arnold, in a display of sincere care and compassion, followed the ambulance and waited at the hospital until
they knew the child would be okay. In follow-up to the incident, the child’s mother took the time to write to
the City of Windsor to commend the actions of these three individuals and to express her gratitude for their
genuine concern, noting that their actions may have saved her son’s life.

5
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 13 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Awards and Recognition
The City of Windsor and its staff were recognized for a number of awards and honours in 2016.
Individual
Alena Sleziak

Certified Contact Centre Manager Designation, RCCSP
2016 Chairperson, Motorola Users Group

Bruce Montone

Fire Chief of the Year Award, Ontario Association of Fire Chiefs
Fire Prevention Leadership Award, First Alert
Elected to Community Living Windsor’s Board of Directors for 3-year term

Christine Dalpe

Information & Referral Specialist Certification, AIRS

Debbie Cercone

Certificate of Appreciation for work to assist refugees with appropriate housing,
Multicultural Council

Jake Renaud

2017 Leadership Windsor/Essex Candidate

Jelena Payne

Certificate of Appreciation for leadership efforts in rallying the community to assist
Syrian refugees, Multicultural Council

Larisa Johnstone

GIS Ambassador, ESRI

Marianna Mosceo

Certified Contact Centre Manager Designation, RCCSP

Mary Ellen Bernard

Certificate of Appreciation for work to welcome Syrian refugees, Multicultural Council

Pat Delmore

2016 Individual Leadership Excellence Award, CUTA

Years of Service Pins
Service Pins are given out each year to recognize staff reaching milestones in 5-year increments between 5
years and 45 years of service to the City.
In 2016, a total of 373 employees reached service milestones.
Years of Service

# of Staff

5

41

10

105

15

87

20

22

25

59

30

35

35

21

40

1

45

2

6
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 14 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Management Windsor Certificate Program
All non-union managers and supervisors are required to complete this program. The courses in this program
(five “mandatory” and three “electives”) represent a series of essential skills intended to ensure consistency
and compliance amongst all non-union management staff.
32 employees were awarded the Management Windsor Certificate in 2016.
Computer Technology Level III Certification
The Computer Technology Certificate is designed to provide employees with the knowledge and tools required
to effectively perform their job duties using Corporate Technology (software and hardware). The Certificate is
set up in 3 progressive skill levels. In order to move to the next level, the courses at the previous level must be
completed with at least a 70% grade.
15 employees successfully completed Level III of the Computer Technology Certification in 2016.
Corporate
Adventure Bay Family Water Park

TripAdvisor “Certificate of Excellence Award”
Best Water Activity or Water Sport Place, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

CANUE

United Way’s “I Believe in My Community” 2016 Community
Workplace Champions Award

Capitol Theatre

Best Theatre, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

CUPE Local 82

Community Living Windsor Partnership Award

Ganatchio Trail

Best Cycling or Hiking Trail, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

Human Resources Department

Community Living Windsor Employer of the Year Award

Ojibway Park

Best Birding or Look-out Point, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

Parks Department

Community Living Windsor Employer of the Year Award

Peace Fountain

Best City Photo Op, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

Tempo

Best Community Art Piece, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

Willistead Manor

Best Architecture Hot Spot, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

Windsor Riverfront

Best Public Park or Garden, TWEPI Best of Windsor Essex

City of Windsor

2016 ‘AA’ Standard & Poor’s Credit Rating
2016 Gord Smith Health Workplace Diamond Award (4 th year)
2016 Bike Friendly Workplace Gold Award (5th year)
8th Place in Public Sector Digest’s Open Cities Index Top Ten
MISA, Excellence in Municipal Systems Award for the “Energy
Management System Initiative”

7
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 15 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Programs & Committees
City staff administer several programs that are worthy of recognition for their success. From the Simply
Brilliant Employee Suggestion program to the Snow Angels Program, staff members work to improve City
service and the lives of our residents.
City staff also voluntarily participate in a number of committees that assist employees with their personal
growth, professional development, personal and family health and wellness and that show appreciation to
fellow employees. Staff volunteering extends to community initiatives as well, such as United Way,
Goodfellows, Breast Cancer Awareness and Sparky’s Toy Drive to name a few, which fall outside of the scope
of this report, but contribute to the betterment of the community.
Staff Appreciation and Recognition Committee
The purpose of the STAR Committee is to promote
informal employee recognition efforts corporately and to
work collaboratively with departments to plan and
facilitate numerous recognition events, activities and
celebrations to support the goals and objectives of
corporate employee appreciation and recognition.
In 2016, The 4th annual Employee Recognition Banquet, held in November, celebrated a wide range of
educational and professional achievements by employees and acknowledged numerous individuals and teams
with awards in the categories of Pride in the Workplace, Exceptional Customer Service and Rookie of the Year.
Other awards presented included the CAO’s Awards of Excellence and the Frances Horvath Memorial Equal
Opportunity Award.
During Employee Appreciation Month (November 2016), 373 Years of Service Pins were presented to
employees who achieved service anniversary milestones this year. Events held that month also included
group attendance at a Windsor Spitfires game and post-game skate with the players, a discounted rate to
attend a private showing of a family movie (a similar event was held in the spring) , an Employee Arts and
Crafts show featuring the talents of our staff, a new online employee-led recipe resource, discounted rates for
fitness and entertainment activities, and a number of prize draws including STAR -sponsored prizes for
employees nominated by their peers as “stars” or for performing “random acts of kindness” in various
departments.
Other events coordinated by STAR Committee members throughout the year included group attendance at a
Windsor Express game, discounted rates at a virtual gaming centre, three family swims at Adventure Bay
Water Park, a weekend scavenger hunt, five separate team lunches with the CAO, a lunchtime learning event,
a Halloween bowling night, and the annual Holiday Party in December.
The STAR Committee was comprised of 13 members in 2016 and allocated an annual budget of $7,500. The
annual awards banquet has an additional budget of $4,700 with expenses offset by ticket sales revenue. The
volunteer efforts and leadership of these Committee members, which routinely extend outside of the normal
work day, are recognized with appreciation for making the events listed above possible.

8
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 16 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Health and Wellness Committee
The City of Windsor Wellness Program is designed to improve the overall health and well-being of all City of
Windsor employees, retirees and family members. The program is provided in conjunction with the WindsorEssex County Health Unit and the Employee & Family Assistance Program provider.
In 2016 an Ergonomist and Wellness Specialist was
hired in order to have Ergonomic and Wellness issues
completed in-house. Key wellness initiatives included
Walking Wednesdays (in partnership with Caesars
Windsor), a Mental Health Forum, the Ultimate
Challenge and a Health Screening Event / Flu Clinics.
Annual Flu vaccinations and wellness clinics, previously
organized by an External Provider, were organized inhouse for City staff at multiple locations, free of cost to
employees. 139 flu shots were administered and 178
staff took advantage of wellness screening for blood pressure, glucose and cholesterol readings, Body Mass
Index (BMI) and waist circumference checks. In addition, employees had the opportunity to interact with
various vendors to receive important health information by participating in Personalized Cancer Screening
Assessments, consulting with a Chiropractor or asking questions to a Green Shield Canada Representative.
Simply Brilliant Employee Suggestion Program
The City of Windsor encourages employees to think creatively about their job and bring forward ideas to
improve the City’s operations. All creative ideas receive an acknowledgement letter signed by the CAO and a
copy is kept in the employee’s file. All implemented creative ideas receive a monetary award ($50) presented
at a departmental meeting and all financial savings/revenue generation ideas are monitored for up to a oneyear period in order to determine actual financial savings/revenue generated. Where savings materialize or
revenues are generated, an award is presented to the suggestor, in the amount of ten percent of the first
year’s savings/revenues, to a maximum of $5,000.
In 2016, 19 ideas were received and 4 were recognized as simply brilliant and implemented to the benefit of
the City’s operations or customer service delivery. Additionally, the two simply brilliant ideas from 2015 that
were implemented have been tracked for a year. The idea regarding the elimination of storm sewer
connections resulted in a savings of approximately $110,000 and the idea regarding water usage has resulted
in an estimated $15,000 in annual savings.
Employee Mentoring Program Committee
The Employee Mentoring Program was launched in 2006 as part of the Corporation’s overall succession
planning strategy. The success of the program is a credit to all participants and especially the mentors who
have volunteered their time to help other employees further their professional development goals.
In 2016, the program welcomed 31 new mentor-protégé partnerships (62 participants). The 7th annual
mentoring awards were presented at the Employee Recognition Banquet. The committee also held a Staff
Development Information Session which attracted 30 new attendees.
9
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 17 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Take Our Kids to Work Day
Take Our Kids to Work™ is the signature program of The Learning Partnership, a national charitable
organization dedicated to championing a strong public education system in Canada. Now in its 22nd year, the
program provides Grade 9 students with the opportunity to experience and learn about the world of work as
they begin to explore possible career paths. More than 250,000 Grade 9 students and at least 75,000
employers across Canada participate each year.
The 2016 Take Our Kids to Work Day was the 17th year the
City of Windsor has successfully run this event, with City
staff hosting 62 Grade 9 students on Wednesday, November
2nd. The day began with a kick off where participants were
provided with information packages to prepare them for
their day. The students and employees were greeted by
Mayor Dilkens and Deputy Fire Chief Steve Laforet, who
provided a warm welcome and encouraging words for the
students. Students and their sponsors had the option of
attending site tours at various City departments. Many of
the students provided very positive feedback, noting that
they found the tours very interesting and informative.
Snow Angels Program
The Snow Angels Program has been operating for 17 years and is a program which attempts to match
volunteers with the City’s aging population and disabled residents in Windsor to help shovel snow throughout
the winter season. The City of Windsor strives to promote responsive municipal services in order to promote
the development of community programs to assist emerging community needs. The City is also committed to
developing new and creative partnerships to focus on providing assistance to seniors and citizens with
disabilities. This program helps sustain Windsor’s image as a diverse, inclusive and accessible community for
all members. In addition, the program also compliments the City’s efforts to encourage and facilitate
volunteerism in our community.
The 2015-2016 season saw 30 volunteers help 54 residents, with 12 volunteers returning from the previous
year. The extremely mild winter resulted in a limited number of snow events for which assistance was
requested. The need for volunteers for the 2016-2017 season is great, as a cooler winter with more
precipitation is expected. The community is encouraged to come together this season to assist those in the
City who are in need. The success of the program in the past has created an outpouring of generosity, where
many citizens are helping their neighbours with snow removal needs as a result of learning about the
program, whether they are registered volunteers or not.

10
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 18 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Highlighted Projects
City of Windsor staff have completed many noteworthy projects over the course of 2016, most of which are
highlighted in the Departmental Accomplishments section. A few projects have been featured below for their
role in advancing the three themes of the 20-Year Strategic Vision (Jobs, Reputation and Quality of Life).
Jobs – Investment Support Program
The City of Windsor designed and created a new Investment Support Program (ISP) for eligible investors in
2016. Launching in early 2017, the program includes stakeholders from a number of departments and
external organizations and guides strategic investment projects through all aspects of the City approval
process.
The objective of the ISP is to work proactively with economically significant projects to provide investors with
a single point of contact, create a feedback-loop from the investor, and enhance Windsor’s ability to expand
and retain business.

An investment is categorized as strategic based on its economic significance for Windsor. Examples of projects
that may be eligible for the ISP may include developments that generate knowledge-based jobs, officeoriented/industrial business parks, and major redevelopments of existing vacant properties.
The intent of the program is to navigate potential investors through municipal requirements on a first come,
first serve approach. The ISP is intended to be initiated to facilitate the investment of strategic projects that
comply with provincial and municipal standards.
The City’s Economic Development Officer is assigned to each strategic investment and works proactively with
other departments and external agencies to guide projects through the municipal process. This includes, but
is not limited to, planning approvals, construction permits, licensing requirements, utilities, technology
requirements, tax and fee estimations, etc.
The Investment Support Program is just one part of administration’s work to support a new economy, creating
and maintaining jobs for residents.

11
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 19 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Reputation – 13th FINA World Swimming Championships (25m)
In December of 2016, the City of Windsor hosted the 13th FINA World Swimming Championships (WSC) (25m).
This is the largest swimming event on the FINA calendar and the first time that it has ever been hosted in
Canada. With over 900 swimmers from 164 countries using over 14,000 room nights of accommodation, this
was the largest sporting event that the City has ever hosted. In addition, the City also hosted the 4 th FINA
World Aquatics Convention, FINA World Sports Medicine Congress and FINA Gala Awards at Caesars Windsor.
It is estimated that these events brought in excess of $20 million in economic benefits to the City of Windsor.
Through a project Charter approved by City Council, a Local Organizing Committee and an Executive
Committee comprised of staff from a number of City Departments began the process of planning the FINA
WSC event in 2014. Given the scope and magnitude of the event, a FINA Team was assembled that included
Operations, Transportation, Accommodations and Protocol & Communications. This also included the
recruitment and coordination of approximately 800 volunteers that provided over 25,000 volunteer hours of
service.
The theme of the event was “Feel the Power”, a
reflection of our powerful community and the
power of the athletes from all over the world. A
Legacy program was a main focus of the event,
which included empowering local young people –
the future of our community – through the
Mayor’s Youth Leadership Team, engaging local
swim clubs & schools to participate in the event,
and senior volunteer positions with decision
making responsibilities led by St Clair College and
the University of Windsor students.
A temporary 10 lane competition pool was
constructed on the ice arena floor of the WFCU
Bowl. This 25m pool, consisting of 1,400 cubic
meters of water, took 12 days to build, provided 3
days of training and 6 days of competition, and was removed in 9 days to restore the boards and ice surface
for hockey – almost a month in total! The East Windsor Community Pool, consisting of a 25m by 21m pool, tot
pool and relax pool, was also constructed at the WFCU to be used as a warm-up and cool-down pool for the
competition. This pool will remain as a legacy to the citizens of Windsor.
The WFCU Facility was transformed into a competition swimming venue “like you’ve never seen before” and
the event was executed like a theater show that included an LED screen the width of the pool and enhanced
sound and lighting. The event received excellent reviews from athletes, the international swimming
federations, international media, and through social media. The event was broadcast to over 100 countries,
showcasing the City of Windsor around the world, placing it on the Global Stage. The successful hosting of the
FINA WSC event strongly supported the strategic theme of enhancing the City of Windsor’s reputation.

12
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 20 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Quality of Life – Open Streets Windsor
In 2016, the City of Windsor held two successful Open Streets events on the mornings of July 17 th and
September 18th. The estimated number of participants for each event range from 8,000 to 10,000, making
Open Streets Windsor the largest free recreation program in the City’s history.
Open Streets events have grown in popularity throughout North and South American as a way of providing
communities with a new way to experience city streets while they are temporarily closed to vehicular traffic.
During the closure, residents are provided with an opportunity to enjoy a wide range of programmed activities
involving music, exercise, art and culture.
With Council direction, a Steering Committee comprised of staff from a number of City Departments began
the process of planning the first ever Open Streets Windsor event in 2014. As might be expected, the logistics,
marketing and volunteers needed to coordinate a safe and memorable event of this scale were very
significant. Staff throughout the Corporation including Emergency Services, Recreation and Culture, Public
Works, Transit, 311, Planning, Communications, Social Services and the Office of the CAO all came together to
contribute to the success of the pilot events.
To minimize the impact of the closures on the motoring
public and allow for more people to attend away from
work and school commitments, the events ran on Sunday
mornings. The route ran east/west over an 8 kilometre
stretch between the communities of Sandwich and Ford
City, primarily along Sandwich St., University Ave. and
Wyandotte St. E., and passed through five of the City’s nine
business improvement areas: Olde Sandwich Towne,
Downtown Windsor, Wyandotte Town Centre, Walkerville
and Ford City.
The work of the Steering Committee included community
consultation involving local businesses, agencies, residents’
associations and the general public.
Many of the
businesses along the route that are normally closed on
Sunday mornings opened their doors to promote their
establishments by offering fun, programmed activities.
Residents’ associations along the route also embraced the
opportunity to participate with activities that included everything from the placement of a piano in the middle
of University Avenue, which was available for anyone to play, to hosting a BBQ rib cook-off.
The City’s implementation of Open Streets offered numerous benefits that improve residents’ quality of life
and support a vibrant, caring community, including physical activity, healthy life choices, support of local
businesses, and instilling cultural and civic pride. Based on surveys conducted and comments received
through a number of social media outlets, the events can, without doubt, be recorded as a great success.

13
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 21 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Departmental Accomplishments
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer

CAO’s Office









Approved 422 reports under the Delegation of Authority (DOA) By-law 208-2008 in 2016, the highest annual
total since the DOA process was first approved in 2004, representing a 20% increase over 2015.
Supported the development, consultation process and finalization of the City’s 20-Year Strategic Vision.
Conducted a comprehensive enterprise risk assessment and determined the seven priority enterprise risks for
2016.
Coordinated a team of 52 volunteers who provided exceptional customer service to delegates attending the
2016 AMO Conference.
Implemented and trained staff on the Corporate Project Management Site.
Conducted consultation sessions with project managers to discuss the current state of corporate project
management and obtain feedback on future priorities.
Developed a Risk Monitoring and Reporting Procedure to guide communication and reporting of risk
information across the Corporation.
Authored the first annual update report on the Enterprise Risk Management Program which included updates to
the Enterprise Risk Management Framework and Policy.

Office of the City Clerk/Licence Commissioner and Corporate Leader – Public Engagement &
Human Services

Council Services





Acquired a Braille printer, which allows the Department to meet requests from the public for accessible
documents.
Continued implementation of LiveLink file management across City departments.
Completed full implementation of and training on Agenda.net for all Council Meetings and Standing Committee
Meetings.
Coordinated ward meetings for all ten wards and facilitated several student/group tours.

14
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 22 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Communication
s Raised over $287,000 in sponsorship and advertising revenue (cash and in-kind).











Published thousands of updates to the City’s website, resulting in 4,319,616 page views and 3,352,123 unique
page views.
Posted approximately 1,200 updates to the City’s Facebook Page, which engaged 83,909 people and reached
2,297,851 people in 2016 and now has over 5,500 followers (lifetime), an increase of more than 2,000 from 2015
and sent 1,041 tweets from the City’s Twitter Account in 2016, which now has 9,819 followers (lifetime), an
increase of more than 2,200 from 2015.
Uploaded 88 videos to the City’s YouTube Channel this year (23 more than last year), including an Open Streets
series, messages from the Mayor’s Office, Baby Teeth Matter, a mannequin challenge video which went viral
(over 60,000 views), and construction updates for New City Hall, Fire Hall #6 & EOC, and East Windsor
Community Pool, raising the City’s viewing total to over 200,000.
Purchased a second online survey account to measure corporate customer service and created 39 new surveys,
25 of which were issued (both internally and externally) in 2016 and 14 of which will be issued in 2017.
Provided internal graphic design for numerous projects including 3 Activity Guides and a 30 page Emergency
Manual.
Increased awareness about numerous City projects through monthly 4-page snapd inserts.
Helped market the Kids Club at Adventure Bay and Open Streets.
Used Programmatic Advertising to increase interest in Adventure Bay, at a minimal cost.

Customer Service








Responded to 127,475 calls, 400 texts and 2,412 emails, entered 48,986 Requests for Service and answered
99,737 public inquiries on municipal information through the 311 service, as of November.
Responded to 18,198 calls and 302 emails through the 211 service, as of November.
Updated 335 records in the 311 knowledge base and added 120 new records to the 211 database.
Instituted a new Quality Assurance program to advance call centre service excellence and continuous
improvement.
Distributed over 2,100 Holiday Sharing Guides in the community which outlines how people can give help and
get help in Windsor-Essex.
Created 29 customized reports and 10 customized maps using 311 data and 14 customized reports using 211
data.
Conducted over 800 Customer Satisfaction Surveys with 92% of respondents satisfied with the 311 service and
93% satisfied with the 211 service City staff provide.

15
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 23 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Human Resources










Promoted corporate learning and development through the training of 2,179 staff (as of December 8) as part of
various courses, workshops and programs and the establishment of a new cohort for the Masters Certificate in
Municipal Leadership Program.
Generated revenue by providing corporate training to 41 external partners through 26 sessions and by providing
3 health and safety courses to 46 employees of neighbouring municipalities.
Promoted health and safety in the workplace through the in-class training of 3,011 individuals in 67 different
courses, providing information for 12 monthly safety talks, adding 4 new online learning courses, conducting 210
workplace violence risk assessments and conducting 205 practical assessments on corporate equipment.
Added online recruitment for Arena Skate Patrol to provide efficiency for students and the public through
technology.
Placed 175 paid and over 100 unpaid students through various programs, community -based training
organizations, community partnerships and the Student Lottery.
Furthered succession planning efforts through the commencement of the Pilot Talent Management Program
which received 27 applications and selected 13 individuals for 5 positions identified as high risk.
Completed or updated the Working Environment Policy and the following procedures: Salary Compression
Procedure, Leave of Absence Procedure, Driver’s License & Driver’s Abstract Procedure, Cell Phone Procedure,
Noise Procedure, Workplace Harassment Procedure and Workplace Violence Procedure.
Promoted employee wellness through the provision of Walking Wednesdays (in partnership with Caesars
Windsor), a Mental Health Forum, the Ultimate Challenge, a health screening event and a flu clinic which
administered 139 shots.
Completed the evaluation of 46 non-union jobs as part of continuing pay equity efforts and completed job
evaluation questionnaires for the new HR/Payroll structure as part of the process review.

Policy, Gaming, Licensing & By-law Enforcement










Completed the business licensing fee review and updated the licensing by-law with the new fees approved in the
2016 Budget.
Participated in and completed a departmental risk assessment.
Developed and implemented rules/regulations for a new gaming initiative introduced by the AGCO.
Achieved a budget surplus for a sixth consecutive year since organizational restructuring.
Conducted work on various major projects i.e., UBER review, Animal Control Contract, assistance with ALS legal
matter.
Partnered with the Parks Department to expand food truck operations at City facilities.
Revised and simplified the dog license application and developed a monthly audit process and control measures
for dog licenses sold by the Humane Society.
Maintained a timely response standard to over 12,000 enforcement requests for service.
Completed the 2016 Spay/Neuter Voucher Program for Cats.

16
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 24 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Windsor Public Library






Opened the Automotive Archives, the first of its kind in Canada, which celebrates the automobile, the industry
and its importance to the development of Windsor and Essex County.
Awarded $200,000 from the Ontario Libraries Capacity Fund, together with partners Chatham-Kent and Guelph,
to develop a community hub of social services for those experiencing homelessness or living in poverty.
Opened the new Local History Centre on the second floor at the Central Library Branch, which offers an
enclosed space where visitors can access resources from the Windsor Public Library Local History Collection, as
well as items from the Municipal Archive.
Purchased a customized GMC truck known as Fred (Freedom to Read, Educate and Discover) to provide mobile
library services, including access to Wi-Fi, computers, a printer, Library Tech Hub technology, books, movies,
video games, tools and do-it-yourself resources.
Began work on the expansion of the Optimist Community Centre to include a 6,500 square foot library and on
the functional plan to turn the historic Fire Hall on Mill Street in Sandwich into the new John Muir Public Library.

Office of the City Engineer and Corporate Leader – Environmental Protection &
Infrastructure Services

Development, Projects & Right of Way





Completed the East Windsor Community Pool ahead of schedule and under budget.
Completed the South Windsor Recreation Complex Expansion – Oakwood Community Centre on time and on
budget.
Carried out a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment of the Riverside Drive Pedestrian Crossings.
Assisted in the successful completion of the Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway.

Facilities










Installed new seats at the Capitol Theatre.
Completed new customer service building and other capital improvements at Lakeview Park Marina.
Repaired expansion joints at the Windsor Justice Facility and the building envelope at Huron Lodge.
Restored heritage windows at Richardson Library.
Updated washrooms/showers in rink change rooms at the WFCU Centre.
Conducted building condition assessments on 42 facilities.
Installed CCTV and card access at various City facilities.
Made asset management improvements for Huron Lodge in the 360Facility database.
Implemented 360Facility database business process improvements.

17
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 25 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Geomatics








Organized a GIS Day 2016 – Facebook Takeover Event which reached nearly 9,000 people and involved live
demos of apps, tutorials, GIS facts and trivia, Story Maps and a survey/quiz.
Created and publicly launched the MyNewCity app which provides anyone new to the City with locations for
assistance with settlement, language training, housing, employment, health, worship, clothing, furniture and
food.
Collaborated with Bike Windsor Essex to launch the Windsor Urban Art Tour app.
Launched the MyWindsorAerial app which allows users to slide back and forth between digital aerial
photography of Windsor from 2000 to present.
Completed a variety of capital construction drawings sets including the MRO Airport Facility – Parking and
Utilities Contract drawings.
Completed a wide variety of specialty mapping products and graphic presentations for Engineering, as well as
other City departments and outside agencies including the Herb Gray Parkway roadway and trail mapping for
various City maps.
Created City and County maps, Visitor Guide maps, and Wine Trail map for TWEPI, marking the beginning of a
new relationship.

Infrastructure






Completed conversion of the street light system to LED (approximately 21,460 fixtures).
Completed various sewer and road construction projects for the Capital Budget, including Norman (S. National
to Alice), Queen (Prince to South), S. National (Tourangeau to Francois), Lens/Vimy/Marentette, St. John
(Menard to Clairview), Meldrum (Tecumseh to Ypres), and Ojibway Sanitary, as well as various municipal drain
works.
Initiated several larger projects including Cabana (Provincial to Howard) and Ouellette (Wyandotte to Elliott).
Received government funding for and completed Jefferson/S. National rail crossing upgrade s.

18
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 26 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Operations










Completed/closed over 14,000 service requests as of September 30, 2016.
Completed and processed, as of November 2016, the inspection of 1,230 street segments (532 lane km), 49
alley segments (4 lane km), 1811 right-of-way sidewalk segments (263 km), and 41 structures, including Parks
Department bridges.
Implemented a new GPS/AVL system for winter control and corporate fleet management uses.
Tested new technologies for sewer and manhole inspections (e.g., Sewer Line Rapid Assessment Tool, Zo om
Camera).
Transitioned the Fleet Stockroom to an outdoor service delivery model for the supply of clothing and safety
equipment.
Developed a fuel site replacement schedule for ongoing fuel site improvements.
Finalized a new Road & Alley Inspection Program Guide.
Completed field surveys and legislated information sharing for 62 level grade crossings to comply with new
regulations.
Instituted a CCTV Records Management Committee.

Parks









Installed 6 AODA compliant play structures at various parks, as well as the City’s first natural based playground
in Mitchell Park.
Installed the sculpture “Anne” in Coventry Gardens, the City’s first set of adult fitness equipment in Walker
Homesite Park, four accessible picnic tables and pads in various park locations, and a ping pong table in Kiwanis
Park, donated by Jim and Diane Moore.
Completed and received City Council approval for the 2016 Master Plan “Rediscover Our Parks”.
Completed the Wyandotte Street median and Drouillard Road underpass beautification projects.
Partnered with various organizations to plant trees and improve natural conditions along Little River.
Improved conditions of the Urban Forest through tree planting, the initiation of a new tree watering program
and the trimming of more than 3,500 trees City-wide.
Worked to protect species at risk by hiring a Biodiversity Coordinator, partnering with DWBA to relocate and
monitor species at risk from the future bridge plaza site to City owned and protected lands, and documenting
Butler’s Garter snakes as part of the new Fire Hall 5 construction project.
Initiated addressing of all municipal parks and started a pilot project for electronic records for playground
inspections.

19
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 27 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Pollution Control











Held a public open house at the Little River Pollution Control Plant to engage and educate the public about the
treatment facility and wastewater related issues.
Completed the first phase of the Lou Romano Water Reclamation Plant Grit Facility Upgrade Project.
Completed the design for the Little River Diesel and MCC Upgrade Project.
Completed the design, tender and award of the Lou Romano Water Reclamation Plant Inlet Upgrade Project.
Completed the installation and validation phase of the Lou Romano Water Reclamation Plant Turbo Bl ower
Upgrade Project resulting in significant energy savings.
Selected to participate in the Great Lakes Climate Change Adaptation Project led by ICLEI Canada with financial
support from the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change under the Canada-Ontario Agreement (COA)
respecting the Great Lakes.
Achieved the First Year Commitment of the Compact of Mayors, which establishes a common platform to
capture the impact of cities’ collective actions through standardized measurements of emissions and climate
risk, and consistent, public reporting of efforts.
Completed baseline community energy studies required to inform the Community Energy Plan which will be
presented to Council in early 2017.
Recognized for the work on improving thermal comfort in Windsor’s Parks and Playgrounds in the Clean Air
Partnership’s Environmental Progress through Collaboration report.

Traffic Operations, Parking and Transportation Planning






Completed Municipal Class Environmental Assessment Studies for 6th Concession Road/North Talbot Road
corridors, for the Central Box Study Area and for Banwell Road.
Completed a Downtown Transportation Strategy.
Developed a School Neighbourhood Policy.
Conducted various transportation studies, processed 262 traffic control plans and 238 Parking By-law and
Traffic By-law amendments, and collected speed data at 144 locations City-wide.
Installed a Transportation Hub at the July Open Streets event, with assistance from the Parks and Ope rations
Departments, which demonstrated alternative cross sections for the public to experience as a precursor to the
planned University Ave Environmental Assessment.

20
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 28 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Office of the City Solicitor and Corporate Leader – Economic Development & Public Safety

Building










Streamlined and created a central filing system for “Ready to Issue” permit applications to increase efficiency.
Reduced average permit issuance timeline from three months in 2015 to two weeks in 2016, consistent with the
requirements of the Ontario Building Code and benefiting the local residential construction industry during the
busiest construction year in over a decade.
Initiated a process for scanning all permit applications at the time of permit issuance and issued letters to all
clients, informing them that faxed permit applications will no longer be accepted and that applications should be
submitted electronically where possible, in order to move towards a paperless environment.
Initiated a review of all outstanding permit applications since the implementation of the AMANDA system and
sent out (abandonment) rejection letters.
Initiated and implemented an internal communication process across various departments for Building Perm its
that require Site Plan Control.
Implemented a tracking system for all permit applications submitted that require ERCA approval.
Implemented use of voice-to-text software for Inspectors to assist with ergonomic issues, efficiency and
consistency for inspection reports.
Creation of the Building Bylaw Officer position to assist with service requests workload, as well as providing
another avenue for the development of Building Inspectors.
Developed in-house staff training for new, complex Code regulations in 2017 aimed towards net-zero housing.

Fire & Rescue










Reached 5500 people through coordinated events with the Windsor Essex Community Housing Corporation as
part of the 2016 Fire Prevention Week, “Don’t Wait, Check the Date! – Replace Smoke Alarms Every 10 Years.”
Hosted 10 ward barbeques as part of a HOT Summer Nights tour, which provided approximately 3500 people
the chance to meet Sparky and firefighters and to learn about fire safety.
Reviewed and expanded elementary school programs delivered at the Safety Village and expanded elementary
school programs delivered in schools to include pre-teens who stay at home alone or babysit.
Developed new high school programs for arson awareness and going away to school and re -organized university
and college school programs for safe and independent living.
Increased number of inspections by 27% and number of violations noted at each inspection by 33%.
Reduced non-compliance of smoke alarms in single family homes to 24% in 2016, as part of the Wake Up, Get a
Working Smoke and CO Alarm program which began in 2013 with a 49% non-compliance rate, by visiting 27,682
homes and distributing 4,457 smoke alarms and batteries over the past 3 years
Certified all District Chiefs as Incident Commanders.
Completed the purchase and implementation of the Self Contained Breathing Apparatus upgrade project to
provide staff with the most up-to-date safety technology available.
Completed the Community Emergency Preparedness Guide which will provide residents with helpful
information to plan and prepare for emergency situations.

21
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 29 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Legal Services & Real Estate








Defended, successfully, a number of cases before the Human Rights Tribunal, the Ontario Municipal Board and
other tribunals.
Defended, successfully, a $5.5M claim before the Ontario Municipal Board.
Won a decision before the Supreme Court of Canada.
Expropriated properties for the Riverside Drive Vista project and for airport expansion purposes.
Sold 13 serviced residential lots on Edward Ave and 2 serviced industrial lots.
Drafted approximately 300 agreements on various subjects.
Participated as panellists at the Windsor Law School, conferences and in-house courses.

Planning











Processed four applications under the Economic Revitalization CIP, which represents the retention of 574 jobs,
addition of 43 jobs, approval of $2,359,583 in grant payments, increase of $1,936,000 in property value
assessment, and leverage of $42,646,000 in private sector investment.
Processed three applications under the Brownfield Redevelopment CIP, which represents redevelopment of
4.77 hectares/11.7 acres of land, rehabilitation of 11,440 sq metres/123,139 sq feet of building space, approval
of $1,709,563 in grant payments, increase of $13,800,000 in property value assessment, and leverage of
$16,391,011 in private sector investment.
Collaborated with the University of Windsor to launch a pilot program to provide students with an opportunity
to research heritage properties.
Conducted research and report writing on the effects of Urban Heat Island in the Downtown and several high
profile heritage properties including Abar’s and Wiser’s Reception Centre.
Designed and developed an updated Sandwich Heritage Walking Tour that is available in digital form and
accessible on mobile devices.
Led the successful implementation of the Open Streets Windsor pilot program events held in July and
September under budget.
Coordinated and organized the Windsor based sessions and tours held as part of the Congress of New Urbanism
conference held in Detroit and hosted the Development Directors of Ontario quarterly meeting in December,
2016.
Completed the Neighbourhood Market Value Analysis and subsequent changes to the Development Charges
Exemption Policy.
Reviewed and approved a number of complex high profile development proposals, including the Greek
Orthodox Church and Devonshire Mall Renovations.

22
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 30 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Provincial Offences





Developed and launched a new website.
Renegotiated the Windsor/Essex Area Intermunicipal Court Service Agreement for another 5 year term.
Renegotiated terms and extension of the lease at the Westcourt Building.
Upgraded the POA office to meet accessibility door standards.

Purchasing









Implemented an online SharePoint system to eliminate paper sole source forms and trained each department
on the new system.
Implemented a new Purchasing Card Management SharePoint system and trained each department on the new
system.
Conducted approximately 185 formal procurement processes (RFTs, RFPs and pre -qualifications) including
several high profile procurements: Fire Halls # 5 and #6, New City Hall General Contractor, New Accessible
Playgrounds (including a Natural Playground), Insurance Services, Capitol Theatre Enhancements, Recreation
Software, Optimist Community Centre Library Addition, Huron Lodge Long-Term Care Caretaking Services and
WFCU Concessions Provider.
Completed road rehabilitation project procurements at a value of $78,422,626.00 (total awarded to date).
Carried out all purchasing processes for FINA.
Conducted 2 corporate by-law training sessions as well as various departmental training sessions.
Revised and updated the Purchasing Card Policy and Procedure.

Risk Management




Issued an RFP for a new Insurance provider for the Corporation effective January, 2017.
Collected more than $237,000 in recoveries for the Corporation.
Opened and investigated over 760 files of which 306 relate to the flood.

23
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 31 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Office of the City Financial Officer/City Treasurer and Corporate Leader – Finance &
Technology

Asset Planning









Met expected projections of $270,000 in revenue from the first full year of solar generation at the Windsor
International Aquatic and Training Centre (WIATC).
Commissioned two 500kW photovoltaic systems at the WFCU Centre and Transit Windsor, each generating
$250,000 annually.
Converted lights in the WFCU Centre Main Bowl to LED.
Installed digital ice plant controls at the WFCU Centre.
Began construction of two combined heat and power systems and the development of a third.
Retro-commissioned 30 buildings.
Completed the Transit Windsor Life Cycle Costing project.
Conducted facility condition assessments for 42 buildings.

Financial Accounting










Completed an initial Contaminated Sites Financial Statement Audit successfully.
Implemented Windsor Public Library on-line donations on website.
Streamlined and implemented new travel authorization and replenishment forms.
Assisted in the development and implementation of new reports to help streamline year end processes such as
OMERS and Vacation reporting.
Assisted in the development and implementation of automated, department-specific tools to improve efficiency
relative to the Corporation’s monthly OMERS payment and weekly CRA payment.
Provided support to the Payroll Business Project Review in the are a of Work Force Management and the
Employee Services Centre.
Increased the number of active vendors using electronic funds transfers by 32.7% in 2016.
Increased the number of electronic funds transfer payments to approximately 25% of all City of Windsor
payments.
Launched the A/P Vendor Centralization Project Pilot Program.

24
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 32 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Financial Planning










Streamlined and increased the accuracy of G/L chart fields and accounts through the New Chartfield Redesign
project, while providing on-going training and information to staff.
Participated in the testing, ongoing review and implementation of new PeopleSoft Financial reports and
queries.
Completed a successful upgrade of Questica budgeting software.
Provided financial support, through regular committee meetings, to the WIATC / Adventure Bay Facility, the
Essex-Windsor Solid Waste Authority, the Department of National Defence and the Windsor Justice Facility.
Led the City’s hosting of the 13th FINA World Swimming Championship (25m) (WSC), the Opening Ceremonies
and the FINA Annual Convention through the Deputy Treasurer of Financial Planning’s role as Project Sponsor
and Chair of the Executive Committee.
Administered the 2017 Budget development process to achieve Council’s mandate of holding the line on taxes
with accelerated timelines to have an administratively recommended Operating Budget available for Council by
December 2016.
Worked with the province on the SAMS implementation project to reconcile payments under the new system,
involving participation in committees throughout the year to identify system challenges and corrective action.
Managed the 2015 MBNC cycle, with the Financial Planning Manager continuing as Co-Chair of the MBNC
Management Committee, which provides the opportunity to visit and meet with new potential municipalities
outside Ontario.
Provided financial support to a number of special projects, including Chartfield Redesign, New City Hall, Payroll
Process Review, FINA 2016 WSC (25m), FINA Diving World Series, City-wide Streetlight LED Conversion, and
Transit Windsor’s Intelligent Transportation Systems and Farebox Projects.

Information Technology








Completed the first pillars of the Amanda 7 Upgrade – Infrastructure & Security.
Went live with the Chartfield Redesign project.
Worked to implement Workforce Management, Employee Service Centre and Employee Self-Service projects.
Expanded Open Data and introduced Information Management.
Improved mobility and collaboration features for employees and external partners for the Extranet, team s ites
and enhanced telecom features.
Expanded the influence of the Business Process Centre for Excellence, which shifted the approach of continuous
improvement beyond the Centre’s direct involvement.

25
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 33 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Taxation & Financial Projects










Completed the 2016 Interim and Final Property Tax Billings, as well as day to day account administration for
over 85,000 property tax accounts.
Administered budgets and levies for each of the 9 Business Improvement Areas.
Launched an external on-line property tax system “My Property Tax”.
Updated all signing authorities with regards to City of Windsor bank and investment accounts.
Planned and executed 3 public property tax sales.
Managed over 1,700 property accounts which were identified as being in tax arrears.
Filed 100 new tax registration certificates and approved and administered approximately 30 new tax payment
plan extension agreements.
Participated in pre-assessment consultations in conjunction with MPAC.
Managed and defended the City’s assessment base, resulting in additional annual tax revenue in excess of
$1.6M.

Office of the Commissioner, Community Development & Health and Corporate Leader –
Social Development, Health, Recreation & Culture

Children’s Services









Added OneHSN modules in order to streamline the process for families looking for child care and applying for
child care subsidy.
Provided more than 30 training events and 3,000 training spaces for courses such as First Aid/CPR and safe food
handling to early learning professionals in Windsor-Essex and launched a new electronic system for training
registration.
Updated the City’s policy requiring all child care centres with purchase of service agreements with the City of
Windsor to have an Inclusion, Access and Equity policy, in order to reflect current language and best practices.
Partnered with the Windsor-Essex County Health Unit (WECHU) and Healthy Kids Community Challenge to
distribute 460 Outdoor Kits to families and 500 Dads Matter Kits to dads with a new baby born in 2016 in
Windsor-Essex to encourage more outdoor time and physical activity.
Coordinated three community forums with Child Care Operators to submit a collective community response to
the Ministry of Education regarding proposed changes to phase two regulations of the new Child Care and Early
Years Act.
Reviewed and updated various policies, procedures and contracts with service providers to reflect changes in
the new Child Care and Early Years Act.
Collaborated with Children First to revise the Levels of Service Tool for the program’s support funding to reflect
best practices and address the current needs of the community.
Developed a Program Support Implementation template, in line with How Does Learning Happen? Ontario’s
Pedagogy for the Early Years, to assist educators in implementing effective strategies that will improve the
overall environment in the classroom.

26
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 34 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Cultural Affairs & Special Events











Assisted with and executed various events including the 2016 CARHA Hockey World Cup, the 2016 FINA Diving
World Series, the 13th FINA World Swimming Championships (25m), the 2016 National Archery Championships,
the 2016 OFSSA Track and Field Championships, Hometown Hockey, two Open Streets, the Mayor’s Walk, the
Return of Busker Fest in Walkerville, Hiram Walker’s 200th Birthday Celebration, the celebration of tulip planting
for Canada’s 150th anniversary, and the historic visit of the USS Detroit.
Provided support to the Great Canadian Flag Project to ensure the target of July 2017 is met.
Relocated the Farmers’ Market to Pelissier Street successfully.
Celebrated the Grand Opening of the Chimczuk Museum.
Hosted the 2nd annual w.a.v.e.s. festival, connecting communities through arts, culture and technology.
Sent out 19 Culture E-blasts to highlight cultural initiatives.
Cleaned and waxed all City sculptures, hosted a Wash the Elephant Day to raise awareness of the Sculpt ure Park
and reinstalled 2 sculptures (Composition with 5 Elements and Anne).
Began work on the Library expansion at the Optimist Community Centre.
Secured a new caterer for the Willistead Manor.

Employment & Social Services










Achieved post-implementation stabilization following the wind-down of the SAMS conversion project, despite
ongoing issues with the provincial system.
Completed a comprehensive Service Plan for Ontario Works (OW) for 2016 which was compl imented by the
Ministry’s Program Supervisor as a very progressive and innovative plan.
Relocated the Leamington OW Office to the centre of the municipality as part of a Community Hub with the
Windsor-Essex Children’s Aid Society, the WECHU and Children’s First and Community Living.
Increased the centralization of discretionary benefits processing to improve customer service through better
monitoring of issuances, greater consistency regarding eligibility criteria and enhanced staff expertise in
specialized health items.
Established and implemented a contingency plan to ensure social assistance recipients received their payments
and other benefits on time during the postal disruption caused by a potential work stoppage.
Increased number of OW clients assessed for Ontario Disability Support Program benefits from 140 in 2014 to
nearly 300 in 2016 in collaboration with several community partners.
Increased number of employment referrals and connections with training and employment programs through
continued integration of Employment Ontario (EO) and OW programs.
Implemented Employment Opportunity Sessions and employment information sessions for youth to reduce
time for clients to be seen by an Employment Services Caseworker and Job Developer and increase employment
opportunities for clients in an expedited fashion.
Met all provincial targets for employment and training, boasting a 25% rate of persons leaving OW due to
employment (3rd quarter 2016), a 69% rate of EO clients placed in a job (2015/2016) and a nearly 10% rate of
EO clients entering training/education (2015/2016).

27
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 35 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Housing Services










Implemented a streamlined electronic application process for the Housing Stability Program.
Input new dedicated line as central access point for direct service to staff for applications and inquiries
regarding the Housing programs.
Designed, planned and implemented the City of Windsor’s first federally coordinated Point in Time Count in
conjunction with the Canadian Alliance to End Homelessness’ 20K Homes Campaign.
Expanded Windsor-Essex’ Housing First program, Windsor Essex Housing Connections, through funding from
the federal Homelessness Partnering Strategy.
Designed, developed, launched and implemented the Investment in Affordable Housing 2016 Extension
Program (IAHE), the Social Housing Apartment Retrofit Program and the Survivor of Domestic Violence-Portable
Housing Benefit Pilot Program.
Secured funding through the Social Infrastructure Fund and Social Housing Improvement Fund to increase
funding to the IAHE Program and to address capital repair for aging social housing stock.
Revamped the Central Housing Registry application form and related documents, together with new verification
guidelines, to make certain parts of the application process easier for applicants and support agencies.
Completed a detailed operational review of five social housing provider developments.
Created 64 new affordable housing units in Windsor-Essex, 23 for singles and persons with disabilities and 41
for low income seniors.

Huron Lodge







Hosted a Volunteer Appreciation Dinner for over 100 dedicated volunteers.
Initiated a Focus Group with representation from all divisions at Huron Lodge to work together to identify and
establish goals that reinforce healthy work efforts and team processes for daily success at Huron Lodge.
Led an initiative which resulted in the compilation of a document that addressed mental health and the
prevalence of behaviours in our health care system through the Huron Lodge Administrator’s role as lead in the
Windsor Essex Long Term Care Facility Operators Group.
Received high praise for staff professionalism, empathy to the residents and welcoming attitude from two
Ministry of Health Inspectors who attended Huron Lodge on a daily basis for a 2 week period to measure
compliance with the Long Term Care Homes Act.
Coordinated with IT to secure a proponent for new clinical software.
Improved resident care and positive outcomes in the areas of restraint use, falls and antipsychotic medication
prevalence through a dedicated effort of the interdisciplinary team.

28
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 36 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Recreation












Achieved Quest 2 High Five, the next level of certification for recreation programs.
Held Windsor’s first annual Jump Start Day at the Forest Glade Community Centre to encourage donations in
support of youth activities.
Increased the number of participants in the Summer Day Camp Program operated across Windsor’s recreational
facilities and expanded the partnership with Family Respite Services to provide support for children with special
needs in the Summer Day Camp Program.
Supported children’s participation in free healthy activities through the Afterschool Program at Adie Knox
Herman Recreation Complex, Gino and Liz Marcus Recreation Complex, Oakwood Community Centre and
Windsor Water World, and the Swim to Survive program for Grade 3’s and Grade 7’s at Adie Knox Herman
Recreation Complex, Gino and Liz Marcus Recreation Complex and the WIATC.
Provided a week-long celebration for Universal Children’s Day, which included free public swim, prize giveaways
and discounted opportunities at recreation facilities across Windsor.
Held several in motion days, promoting the importance of physical activity.
Assisted in the construction of the East Windsor Community Pool and the South Windsor Recreation Complex
Expansion – Oakwood Community Centre.
Executed a new operating agreement for concessions at the WFCU Centre.
Accommodated community groups who were displaced during the FINA 2016 WSC (25m) successfully.

Social Policy Planning










Facilitated the Corporate effort, in collaboration with the WECHU, to revise and update the Smoking By-law to
prohibit smoking and smoking products on certain City properties.
Organized a community forum for community partners regarding Round 2 of poverty reduction funding from
Ontario’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Office.
Led the local organization of two consultations for the Ministry of Government and Consumer Services to
inform community partners on proposed legislation to increase consumer protections f or users of payday loans,
instalment loans and cheque cashing services.
Collaborated with the Schulich School of Medicine, Health Force Ontario and Tourism Windsor Essex Pelee
Island to create a City of Windsor physician recruitment website.
Worked with various organizations to welcome and establish nearly 1,000 government assisted refugees into
the Windsor community.
Collaborated with Geomatics to develop the MyNewCity app to help newcomers find clinics, libraries and social
services.
Hosted the Windsor Essex Local Immigration Partnership Annual Forum with over 150 attendees.
Hosted the July 1 Citizenship Ceremony at the WIATC where 35 new Canadians were sworn in.
Hosted the Windsor Essex Express Entry Employer Breakfast to provide Windsor-Essex employers with the
opportunity to hear about the new federal system which helps employers recruit foreign trained employees to
fill local labour market needs.

29
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 37 of 129

Municipal Accomplishments
2016 Report
Office of the CEO Your Quick Gateway (YQG) & Windsor-Detroit Tunnel Corporation (WDTC)
and Corporate Leader – Transportation Services

Transit Windsor







Travelled over 5 million kilometres, providing transportation to more than 6 million riders in the
community.
Finalized 12-year Life Cycle, Fleet Asset Management Plan and received approval from City Council.
Applied for $10.2M in transit improvements under Phase 1 of the Public Transit Infrastructure Fund.
Implemented a U-Pass, providing transportation to 11,000+ University of Windsor students
Began installation of the Intelligent Transportation System.
Redesigned and replaced over 1,200 bus stop signs to improve service and accessibility.

YQG Windsor International Airport






Paid a $1M dividend from operations to the City of Windsor.
Developed new air service routes to Cayo Coco (Cuba), Florida and Montego Bay.
Increased annual passenger volumes by 21% (year-to-date) over 2015.
Increased local share of passengers to 20% from 7% in 2009.
Accommodated the construction of the 50 megawatt solar farm on airport grounds.

Windsor-Detroit Tunnel Corporation



Paid $1M dividend from operations to the City of Windsor.
Increased annual traffic volumes (northbound and southbound) 5.58% over 2015.

30
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 38 of 129

Item No. 7.3
Planning & Building Services
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: CM 59/2016
Author’s Contact:
Kevin Alexander, MCIP-RPP
Senior Planner--Special Projects

Report Date: 10/26/2016
Date to Council: February 6, 2017
Clerk’s File #: SR2017

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Response to CQ34-2016: Design Guidelines for fencing along Riverside
Drive

RECOMMENDATION:
THAT Windsor City Council ACCEPT this Report as INFORMATION

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
On August 2, 2016, at the regular meeting of Windsor City Councillor Kusmierczyk
submitted CQ34-2016 that: “Asks Administration report back on updates to design
guidelines for fencing along Riverside Drive to require decorative fencing rather than
industrial/chain link on public and private property?
The purpose of this report is to answer the Council Question by identifying policies and
documents relevant to Riverside Drive that require a higher design standard for fencing
along Riverside Drive for both public and private properties. The report will also include
examples of public and private properties where fencing has been provided. The
Discussion section of the report will provide Council the option to require a higher
standard for fencing for both public and private property along Riverside Drive.

1

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 39 of 129

DISCUSSION:
History
Riverside Drive, historically known as the St. Clair Trail by early settlers is one of the
city and region’s most significant pathways serving as an east and west gateway linking
important neighbourhoods of Sandwich Town, Downtown Windsor, Walkerville,
Riverside, and with other municipalities such as the Town of Tecumseh. It provides a
means of transportation for pedestrians, cyclists, and automobiles and several of
Windsor’s important recreation areas north and south of Riverside Drive. Riverside
Drives importance was recognized by Windsor City Council in the 1990s when it was
identified as a Scenic Drive on Schedule F: Roads and Bikeways and as a Civic Way on
Schedule G: Civic Image of Windsor’s Official Plan.
Riverside Drives importance has been highlighted in several documents over the years
including the following which reference a higher standard for elements such as
landscaping, screening and fencing:
The Official Plan
There are no specific guidelines for fencing along Riverside Drive, however based on its
designation as a Scenic Drive Section 7.2.6.8 (vii) states that “The municipal
streetscape design of the Scenic Drive shall be guided by the urban design policies of
the Official Plan”.
Section 8 Urban Design of the City’s Official Plan includes several policies related to
protecting views and vistas throughout the City and specifically of the Detroit River,
skyline and open space areas. Section 8.11.2.19 states that “Council will encourage the
partial screening of surface parking lots through the use of low fences, walls, berms and
other landscape elements, and through the location of lots away from street view, while
still permitting views for orientation and safety”. However, there is no specific reference
to using decorative fencing verses industrial or chain link.
Section 8.11.2.13 also emphasises the importance of the Civic Way designation by
enhancing the public rights-of-way consistent with an attractive image using unifying
elements such as landscaping, fixtures and boulevard and median treatments. We
consider decorative fencing as a landscape element.
As it relates to Riverside Drive as a Scenic Drive and the Central Riverfront Parkland
Section 1.13.18, Volume 2 of the Official Plan states that “boulevards on the riverfront
side of Riverside Drive will include enhanced landscape treatments to provide a strong
visual image for the Central Riverfront”. We consider decorative fencing to form part of
an enhanced landscape treatment if fencing is required.

2

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 40 of 129

Riverside Drive Streetscape Manual and Site Plan Review Manual
The Urban Design Section of the Planning and Building Department are currently
drafting two documents that will include guidelines for fencing and screening. The
Riverside Drive Streetscape Manual will only apply to public and private property along
Riverside Drive while the Site Plan Review Manual will be applied city-wide (and include
Riverside Drive).
The Riverside Drive Streetscape Manual defines fencing/screening and low walls as
part of the streetscape improvements and screening devices are considered to be street
furniture. Screening devices are used to shield an undesirable view, such as a surface
parking lot, and to create a continuous building edge along the sidewalk that defines
and unifies the streetscape. Screening devices will be designed based on the following
criteria:






Screening devices should have an ornamental character as well as utilitarian
function.
The materials selected for screening devices must relate to the surrounding
building architecture through the use of same or similar design details and
reinforce the character of the overall district.
The height of screening devices should be 0.8m to 1.1m (2.7’ to 3.5’) to allow for
viewing into the adjacent space as a security measure without creating an area
of entrapment. - Where necessary, the screening device should have openings
measuring 1.5m to 2.0m (5.0’ to 6.5’) in width to provide for pedestrian access to
the sidewalk and that is barrier free.
Screening devices should be located on the property line between the public
right-of-way and the abutting private property containing a use that must be
screened.

The Site Plan Review Manual provides guidelines for screening and defines screening
as a combination of small shrubs, low walls, and decorative materials that compliment
buildings styles. Screening walls adjacent public sidewalks shall be decorative and may
be required to be combined with planters and landscaping to improve the aesthetic
quality.
Fence By-law 170-2012
Section 4, Residential Fence Regulations of the City’s Fence By-law 170-2012 provides
several regulations on height limits for fencing, however these height limits do not apply
to hedges if the hedge is located in the side yard or rear yard unless the hedge is
located in any rear yard situated on the north side of Riverside Drive East between
Strabane Avenue and Lakeview Avenue. This area includes not only residential
properties but several kilometres of Parkland. The by-law also provides standards for
fence maintenance but does not reference the type of fencing that can be used.

3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 41 of 129

CR243/2009 and By-Law 117-2009
A precedent has been set, in 2009 Council passed
CR2413/2009 and By-Law 117-2009 approving
two blocks of property east of the Casino
(bounded by Riverside Drive East, Aylmer,
University, and Glengarry Avenues) for surface
parking areas provided that owners bring the
parking areas in conformity with Zoning By-Law
8600 regarding standards for “Public Parking
Areas” and adhere to the following design
guidelines through the Site Plan Control process:
i.

ii.

Except at vehicular access points, parking
areas shall be defined along their street
frontages using a decorative fence system
composed of painted vertical pickets
interspersed at regular intervals with pillars
constructed of masonry or a concrete or of
concrete consistent with the colour and
design approach used in the retaining walls
at Caesars Windsor in the surrounding
area;

Surface Parking Areas East of the Casino

In addition to the decorative fence system, parking area landscaping shall include
lighting, drainage, and vegetation consistent with the City’s parking area
landscaping standards.

Since CR2413/2009 and By-Law 117-2009 have been in place many of these parking
areas have been developed based on the above fencing/landscape design guidelines.
In addition through negotiations as part of the Site Plan Review process these design
guidelines have been used to implement the policies in the Official Plan related to
surface parking areas on a city-wide basis. Examples include the Burger King located at
University Avenue East and Goyeau Street, the Tim Horton’s at Crawford Avenue and
Wyandotte Street West, Caesars Windsor parking area located at Chatham Street West
and McDougall Avenue, the Shoppers Drug Mart at Lauzon Road and Wyandotte Street
East (See Appendix ‘A’ for photo examples).
Current Practices along Riverside Drive
Public Property
Generally, when fencing is required a decorative type fence has been installed, as part
of the Central Riverfront Implementation Plan (CRIP) and development of the Central
4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 42 of 129

Riverfront Park Lands. This area includes nearly 6 kilometres of Parkland spanning
from Sandwich Town to Walkerville. Examples include the Peace Beacon/Bistro
(Riverside Drive and Ouellette Avenue), the Festival Plaza Stage (Riverside Drive and
McDougall Avenue), the Bert Weeks Memorial Fountain, and Retention Treatment
Basin (RTB) Project (See Appendix ‘B; for photo examples).
However, there are other examples along riverfront parks where chain link fence have
been used because of function and cost constraints. Chain link fence has been used
along portions of Sandpoint Beach to control access to the beach, making it safer for
lifeguards to effectively monitor the beach, to channel pedestrians from the parking lots
on the south side of Riverside Drive (across the street) to the traffic light, instead of
encouraging free crossing of Riverside Drive at any point along the Beach frontage (See
Appendix ‘C’ for photo examples).
Chain link fence has also been used as part of the Amphitheatre/Stage project for the
construction of part of the Riverside Drive Promenade. Initially, a guardrail and chain
link fence existed along the edge of the north side of Riverside Drive to protect cars and
pedestrians from falling several feet. The Central Riverfront Implementation Plan
(CRIP) calls for a Pedestrian Promenade (tree lined sidewalk) in this area along
Riverside Drive, but this was not part of the original project scope or budget. As part of
the Festival Plaza Stage and RTB projects the tree lined sidewalk space was
constructed providing increased public safety and an improved connection to the park.
Chain link fencing was installed on a temporary basis until the ground settles and a
masonry retaining wall can be constructed to support the soil. Once constructed the
chain link fence will be replaced with decorative fencing that also meets safety
requirements in this location. These improvements have been identified in the 2019 to
2020 Public Works Capital Budget as “Festival Retaining Wall Design and
Construction”. Chain link fencing and guard rails were also installed years ago along
Riverside Drive East adjacent Dieppe Park for similar safety reasons (See Appendix ‘C’
for photo examples).
Private Property
Most private property along Riverside Drive are residential and there does not appear to
be a need to require fencing beyond what is included in Fence by-law 170-2012, and
generally the majority of home owners would install a combination of decorative fence
or wall with vegetation. However there are areas where decorative fencing requirements
could result in an improved appearance where commercial and Industrial properties
exist along Riverside Drive (see Appendix ‘D’ for examples). If there are any future
redevelopment proposals and a policy is in place, it can be implemented through the
development review process.

5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 43 of 129

If Council would like to approve a policy to ensure future improvements to fencing for
public parks and private commercial and Industrial properties along Riverside Drive the
following policy is recommended:
Decorative Fencing, Low Masonry Walls and Landscaping on Riverside Drive
i.

Decorative fencing made of either vertical metal pickets or low masonry walls or
a combination of with landscaping will be required along Riverside Drive when
fencing is required;

ii.

Notwithstanding a), single family residential properties are exempt from this
requirement and will continue to be subject to Fence By-law 170-2012.

Parking Areas along Riverside Drive
All Parking areas along Riverside Drive are required to adhere to the following design
guidelines through the Site Plan Review process:
i.

Except at vehicular access points, parking areas shall be defined along their
street frontages using a decorative fence system composed of metal vertical
pickets interspersed at regular intervals or low masonry walls and pillars or a
combination of with landscaping;

ii.

In addition to the decorative fence system, parking area landscaping shall include
lighting, drainage, and vegetation consistent with the City’s parking area
landscaping standards.

The policies identified above can also be incorporated into future policies, design
guidelines and standards for Riverside Drive.

RISK ANALYSIS:
There will be extra cost when requiring a higher design standard such as decorative
fencing verses chain link when fencing is required however as identified by Council
throughout the years Riverside is one of the most important streets in our City and
valued by the community. Riverside Drive connects with residents most cherished
Parks and neighbourhoods, and serves as a gateway to the City linking surrounding
municipalities. The risk in not providing this higher standard is that the City will have
little ability to encourage an improved image when chain link is the minimum standard.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
There will be an increased cost to the City associated with a higher design standard for
fencing such as decorative verses chain link, this increase would have to be included in
the budget on a project by project basis. However, as identified through the examples
6

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 44 of 129

provided in the section of this report on Current Practices for Riverside Drive for
public property most recent projects already include the necessary budget to
incorporate a higher design standard for amenities such as decorative fencing, therefore
this increase in requiring a higher standard will be minimal when considering similar
public parks related projects. The cost (before labour) of providing decorative fencing
for private property is $15 to $20 per linear foot ($50 to $65 per linear metre) verses
chain-link at $8 to $15 per linear foot ($26 to $50 per linear metre). The cost (before
labour) of providing decorative fencing for public (Parks) property is approximately $55
to $100 per linear foot ($185 to $330 per linear metre) verses chain-link at $15 to $20
per linear foot ($50 to $65 per linear metre). The higher costs on private (Parks)
property along Riverfront Parkland is related to both safety and aesthetic reasons
because often fencing along the Riverfront Parkland is used to prevent pedestrians from
falling from a steep and much higher grade level.
Through the Site Plan review process Administration currently requests higher design
standards such as decorative fencing and landscaping as permitted by the Planning Act
and Site Plan Control By-law when appropriate. Therefore the increased cost to private
land owners would be similar to what exists today and not unusual given current
standards required through the Site Plan Review Process.

CONSULTATIONS:
Information regarding Fence By-Law 170-2012 is provided in consultation with Dan
Lunardi, Manger of Inspections/Deputy CBO from the Planning and Building
Department. Information regarding the cost of fencing for private verses public
properties has been provided by the Manager of Parks Development, from the Parks
and Recreation Department, and The Urban Design Planner from the Planning and
Building Department.

CONCLUSION:
Through the development of the Central Riverfront Parklands the City typically includes
sufficient funds in the budget for projects such as the Festival Plaza stage and Festival
Plaza, and Peace Beacon/Bistro for a higher design standard such as decorative
fencing and landscaping instead of chain link fencing. However, such a policy as
provided in the Discussion section of this report would ensure that this higher design
standard is included in future project budgets and design guidelines concerning lands
on the north and south sides of Riverside Drive and ensure that new industrial and
commercial development along Riverside Drive adheres to this same standard.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A
7

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 45 of 129

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Thom Hunt

City Planner/Executive Director

John Revell

Chief Building Official

Wira Vendrasco

Deputy City Solicitor

Shelby Askin Hager

City Solicitor

Mike Clement

Manager of Parks Development

Mark Winterton

City Engineer

Mark Winterton for Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:
1 Appendix
2 Appendix
3 Appendix
4 Appendix

'A'
'B'
‘C’
'D'

8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 46 of 129

Appendix ‘A’

Burger King low masonry (brick) wall and decorative fencing with landscaping at the South -West corner of University
Avenue East and Goyeau Street.

Tim Horton’s low masonry (brick) wall and decorative
fencing with landscaping at the South-West corner of
Crawford Avenue and Wyandotte Street West (Source:
Google Street View May 2015).

Caesars Windsor low masonry wall and decorative fencing
with trees and sod at the South-West corner of Chatham
Street East and McDougall Avenue (Source: Google Street
View May 2015).

Shoppers Drug Mart Decorative fencing and masonry (brick) pillars with landscaping located at Lauzon Road and Frank
Avenue (Source: Google Street View May 2014)
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 47 of 129

Appendix ‘B’

Peace Beacon/Bistro with decorative fencing and landscaping located at the North -West corner of Riverside Drive West
and Ouellette Avenue on the Central Riverfront (source: Google Street View May 2015).

Festival Plaza Stage with low masonry (formed concrete) wall and decorative fencing located on the Central Riverfront at
McDougall St and Riverside Drive East North of Riverside Drive (Source: Google Street View May 2015).

Bert Weeks Memorial Garden with low masonry wall on the Central Riverfront North of Riverside Drive just East of Parent
Avenue (Source: Google Street View May 2014).
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 48 of 129

Retention Treatment Basin with decorative fencing on the Central Riverfront on the North Side of Riverside Drive west of
Aylmer Avenue (Source: Google Street View, May 14, 2014).

Retention Treatment Basin with decorative fencing on the Central Riverfront on the North Side of Riverside Drive west of
Aylmer Avenue (Source: Google Street View, May 14, 2014).

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 49 of 129

Appendix ‘C’

Chain link fencing at Sandpoint Beach along Riverside Drive East (Source: Google Street View May 2012)

Chain link fencing at Sandpoint Beach along Riverside Drive East (Source: Google Street View May 2014)

Chain link fencing at Sandpoint Beach on the south side along Riverside Drive boarders the parking area (Source: Google
Street View May 2014)

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 50 of 129

Chain link fencing overlooking the Festival Plaza on the Central Riverfront just east of the Stage and
McDougall Street along the North side of Riverside Drive East.

Chain link fencing overlooking the Festival Plaza on the Central Riverfront adjacent the Stage and
McDougall Street along the North side of Riverside Drive East (Source: Google Street view May 2015).

Chain link fencing overlooking the Civic Terrace and Dieppe Gardens on the Central Riverfront adjacent
the Stage and west of McDougall Street along the North side of Riverside Drive East (Source: Google
Street view May 2015).

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 51 of 129

Chain link fencing overlooking Dieppe Gardens on the Central Riverfront along the North side of Riverside
Drive East (Source: Google Street view May 2015).

Chain link fencing at Kiwanis Park on the south side of Riverside Drive (Source: Google Street View May
2014)

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 52 of 129

Appendix ‘D’

Chain link fencing on the North side Riverside Drive at 1950-2072 Riverside Drive East of the Central Riverfront
Parkland (Source Google Street view May 2014).

Chain link fencing on the North side Riverside Drive at 1950-2072 Riverside Drive East of the Central Riverfront Parkland
(Source Google Street view May 2014).

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 53 of 129

Chain Link fencing on the south side of 2427 Riverside Drive East at Montreuil Avenue (Source Google Street view May
2015).

Chain Link and security fencing on the north side of Riverside Drive East from just past Montreuil Avenue to Pratt Street
(Source Google Street view May 2015).

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 54 of 129

Chain Link fencing on the south side of Riverside Drive East at Montreuil Avenue (Source Google Street view June 2012).

Commercial Plaza at 7875 Lauzon Road at the intersection of Riverside Drive East and Lauzon provides some landscaping
(Source: Google Street View May 2014)

Commercial Plaza at 200-214 Lauzon Road at the intersection of Riverside Drive East and Lauzon Road (Source: Google
Street View May 2014)
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 55 of 129

Item No. 7.4
Legal Services, Real Estate &
Risk Management
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: CM 6/2017
Author’s Contact:
Susan Hirota
Legal Counsel
519-255-6100 ext 6493
shirota@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/17/2017
Date to Council: February 6, 2017
Clerk’s File #: SR2017

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: CQ23-2016 - Use of Aerial Drones in Parks
City Wide

RECOMMENDATION:
THAT this response to CQ23-2016 be RECEIVED for information.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
On June 7, 2016, Councillor Kusmierczyk asked the following question:
CQ23/2016:
Asks that Administration report back on what regulations – if any – exist relating to the
use of aerial drones in public parks, and I would like that report to include best practices
from other municipalities as well as a recommendation for the City of Windsor.

Page 1 of 5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 56 of 129

DISCUSSION:
Federal Regulations
Drones are regulated by Transport Canada under federal aviation laws including the
Aeronautics Act and the Canadian Aviation Regulations.
Drones that weigh 35 kg or less and are used for strictly recreational purposes (i.e.
hobby and personal enjoyment) are considered “model aircraft” and are currently
exempt from the vast majority of federal regulations. Model aircrafts, however, must still
be operated safely. Flying them in a manner that endangers the safety of other aircraft
is an offence under both the Aeronautics Act and the Criminal Code of Canada.
Recreational drones that weigh more than 35 kg and drones that are used for any nonrecreational purpose (i.e. work, research) are considered Unmanned Air Vehicles
(UAVs) and a Special Flight Operations Certificate (SFOC) from Transport Canada is
required. An SFOC is not required, however, for non-recreational drones of certain
weight classes (1 kg or less) (more than 1 kg up to and including 25 kg) if all of
Transport Canada’s numerous exemption conditions can be met. In those limited
circumstances, a non-recreational drone can be operated without a SFOC but the
operator must provide Transport Canada with contact information, UAV model/serial
number and confirmation that the required minimum distances from airports and built-up
areas will be maintained.
Attached as Appendix “A” is a flow chart that explains when permission is required from
Transport Canada to fly an unmanned aircraft.
Attached as Appendix “B” are recommendations from Transport Canada on flying
drones safely and legally.
Members of the public who wish to file a complaint about the unsafe operation of a
drone may do so by completing an online Drone Incident Report Form and submitting it
to
Transport Canada
(https://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/civilaviation/opssvs/drone-incidentreport-form.html). Attached as Appendix “C” is a copy of the Drone Incident Report
Form.
Transport Canada intends to introduce new regulations in 2017 that will apply to UAVs
weighing 25 kilograms or less that are operated within visual line-of-sight. The
proposed regulatory amendments are intended to ensure the safe and reliable operation
of UAVs in Canadian airspace and will:


establish classifications including a proposal for the possibility of having a
very small (lower threshold) category of aircraft;
Page 2 of 5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 57 of 129



clarify terminology;



establish aircraft marking and registration requirements;



address personnel licensing and training; and



create flight rules

Transport Canada also intends to preserve the SFOC process to focus on higher risk
operations, including UAVs larger than 25 kilograms and those operated beyond visual
line-of-sight.
Aeronautics is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the federal government. A municipality
may, however, regulate how a municipal park is used.
Parks By-law 200-2002
Parks By-law 200-2002 currently prohibits the operation of “powered models of aircraft”
in a park unless authorized by the Commissioner of Parks and Recreation by permit.
The Parks By-law does not define “powered models of aircraft” but under the Canadian
Aviation Regulations, a “model aircraft” means an aircraft with a total weight not
exceeding 35 kg (77.2 pounds) that is mechanically driven or launched into flight for
recreational purposes and that is not designed to carry persons or other living creatures.
Arguably, the Parks By-law already applies to recreational drones not exceeding 35 kg
by use of the term “powered models of aircraft”.
Other Municipalities
Several municipalities were asked whether they regulate the operation of drones. The
responses are set out in the following table:
Municipality

Drone Regulation

LaSalle

Not regulated

Amherstburg

Not regulated

Essex

Not regulated

Lakeshore

Not regulated

Kingsville

Not regulated

Leamington

Not regulated
Page 3 of 5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 58 of 129

Tecumseh

Prohibits “powered models of aircraft” in a
park unless authorized by permit

London

Not specifically regulated but taking photos
or video of a person in a park is prohibited
unless with consent

Ottawa

Prohibits “motor driven model airplanes” in
a park

Toronto

Prohibits “powered models of aircraft” in a
park unless authorized by permit

RISK ANALYSIS:
The federal government does not currently regulate drones that weigh 35 kg or less and
that are operated for strictly recreational purposes. Amendments to the Canadian
Aviation Regulations in 2017 may change this.
Drones that are not operated safely and in accordance with Transport Canada’s
recommendations and regulations, are hazards. Given that members of the public,
particularly children, frequent parks for sporting events and other recreational pursuits, it
may be advisable to prohibit the use of drones in parks unless authorized by the Parks
Department by permit.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
N/A

CONSULTATIONS:
Mike Clement, Manager Parks Development
Ann Kalinowski, Manager of By-law Enforcement

CONCLUSION:
The operation of drones as a recreational activity is increasing in popularity and most
municipalities do not have by-laws in place regulating their use. The City of Windsor’s
existing Parks By-law could arguably apply to drones under a technical analysis of the
term “powered models of aircraft”. If Council wishes to prohibit the use of drones in
parks unless authorized by permit, the by-law should be amended to include terms that
are more familiar to members of the public such as “drone” and “UAV”.
Page 4 of 5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 59 of 129

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Susan Hirota

Legal Counsel

Shelby Askin Hager

City Solicitor

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:
1 Appendix A - Canada “Flying an unmanned aircraft? Find out if you need permission
from Transport Canada”
2 Transport Canada “Do’s and Don’ts for flying your drone safely and legally”3
Transport Canada “Drone incident report form”

Page 5 of 5

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 60 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 61 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 62 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 63 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 64 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 65 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 66 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 67 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 68 of 129

Item No. 7.5

Taxation & Financial Projects
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: CM 7/2017
Author’s Contact:
Tano Ferraro
Manager of Property Taxation and
Taxpayer Support
519-255-6100 ext 6258
gferraro@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/19/2017
Date to Council: February 6, 2017
Clerk’s File #: AFB/12410

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: City Wide 2017 BIA Budget Review and Approval Process

RECOMMENDATION:
That City Council RECEIVE this report for information.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
Sections 204 to 214 of the Ontario Municipal Act. 2001 (the Act) prescribes guidance
with regards to Business Improvement Areas (BIA’s).
Annually, the Board of
Management is required to prepare a proposed budget and Council is required to
approve said budget.
Budgets are typically for expenses such as advertising and
promotion, newsletters, beautification items, flower baskets, administrative costs, etc.
which are used within the BIA boundaries to promote businesses and attract customers.
Repayments to the City for capital projects (ex. streetscaping) or other cash advances
which have been approved are also included in the annual budgets. The budget
request submissions are required to be approved by the BIA membership as evidence
by way of minutes from the membership meeting.

Page 1 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 69 of 129

DISCUSSION:
Each year Administration works in conjunction with the BIA’s to obtain and review their
annual budget submission.
A separate charge is levied upon properties of the commercial and industrial classes
within the BIA. This special charge is collected in the same manner as property taxes.
Historically Administration has added this charge to the final tax bill notice of each
business classified as being included in the BIA boundary. Payment is made over the
last three instalments of the year.
Administration is still in the process of collecting and reviewing each of the nine BIA
budget submissions. In addition, Administration is finalizing prior year reconciliations
with each of the BIA’s. Once complete a full report will be brought forward for Council’s
consideration prior to issuance of the 2017 final tax bills.
Until such time as funds are provided to the BIA, most are not in a cash flow position to
proceed with planned expenditures. In keeping with prior years, Administration will be
providing each BIA with no more than 50% of the 2016 approved budget at this time
with the balance to be provided once the final levies and notices have been issued to
the members. BIA’s are required to submit annual audited financial statements and any
such instalment or final levy will be subject to the BIA complying with this request.

RISK ANALYSIS:
There is little risk to the municipality with regards to BIA levies. While funds are
advanced to each of the BIA’s, those funds are recovered through a charge to the BIA
membership on the annual property tax bill. Property taxes are secured in that they are
attached to the property and not the member. Therefore should a property owner fail to
make a payment of the annual charge, it can be recovered through subsequent property
owners or collection action.
Typically the final rate to achieve the total budget request is based upon the combined
assessment values (subject to some min/max values as chosen by the individual BIA’s).
There is some risk to the BIA that should there be changes in assessment values, either
positive or negative, this will impact the total amount to be recovered. To mitigate this
risk and to avoid large fluctuations which may result in a substantial repayment to the
City, Administration withholds a 5% allowance from each year’s levy which is released
at the end of each year.

Page 2 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 70 of 129

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
Based upon the 2016 approved budgets for each of the BIA’s an instalment of no more
than 50% will be provided by the end of March 2017. This instalment will be subject to
the results of the 2016 reconciliation with the BIA and compliance with the requirement
to provide audited financial statements and satisfactory responses to other
Administrative requests. In addition, for those BIA’s subject to capital project
repayments, the installment will be reduced by 50% of the repayment.

Business Improvement
Area

2016 Approved Net Levy

2017 Instalment (max.)

Downtown Windsor Business
Improvement Association

$538,000

$269,000

Erie Street – Via Italia
Ford City
Olde Riverside Towne Centre
Olde Sandwich Towne
Ottawa Street
Pillette Village
Walkerville District
Wyandotte Towne Centre

$100,000
$28,800
$60,000
$67,220
$71,965
$26,100
$45,000
$94,000

$50,000
$14,400
$30,000
$33,610
$35,983
$13,050
$22,500
$47,000

CONSULTATIONS:
N/A

CONCLUSION:
Once the 2017 BIA budget submissions have all been received and Administration has
completed all of its due diligence, a report will be brought forward to City Council to
seek the necessary approvals.

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Janice Guthrie

Deputy Treasurer-Taxation and Financial
Projects

Joseph Mancina

Chief Financial Officer and City Treasurer
Page 3 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 71 of 129

Name

Title

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name
Address
Debi Croucher – 419
Pelissier
DWBIA
Street Windsor,
Ontario
N9A
4L2
Tessa
Mancini 854 Erie Street
Ruggirello– Erie E.
Windsor,
Street – Via Italia Ontario
N9A
BIA
3Y6
Randy
1076 Drouillard
Diestelmann
– Rd,
Windsor,
Ford City BIA
Ontario
N8Y
2P8
Bridget
2334 Cypress
Scheuerrman – Road Windsor,
Olde
Riverside Ontario
N8P
Towne
Centre 0A7
BIA
Mary
Ann 3118 Sandwich
Cuderman
St
Windsor,
– Olde Sandwich Ontario
N9C
Towne BIA
1A6
JefferyWood–
1464
Ottawa
Ottawa
Street Street Windsor,
BIA
Ontario
N8X
2G2
Greg Plante – 4769 Wyandotte
Pillette
Village Street
E.
BIA
Windsor,
Ontario
N8Y1H8
Jake Rondot – 1145
Beals
Walkerville
Street
District BIA
Windsor,
Ontario
N9E
4B7
Sami Mazloum – 2517 Longfellow
Wyandotte Town Ave
Windsor,
Centre BIA
ON N9E 2K8

Email Address
debi@downtownwindsor.ca

Telephone
519-2525723

viaitaliabia@gmail.com

519-2533329

spectrumrandy@gmail.com

519-5637497

bscheuerrman@cogeco.ca

519-9626550

macuderman@hotmail.com
mailto:

519-2580361

jefferywoodhair@gmail.com

519-2522394

greg@imaginativeimaging.ca

519-9621500

info@walkervilledistrict.com

226-3469242

ssmazloum@gmail.com

519-9772956

FAX

Page 4 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 72 of 129

Item No. 7.6
Public Works - Operations
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 10/2017
Author’s Contact:
Jeff Hagan
Policy Analyst
519-255-6247 ext 6003
jhagan@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/12/2017
Date to Council: 2/6/2017
Clerk’s File #: ACO/12103

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: CR629/2016 - George Avenue and Ypres Avenue Petition - Ward 5

RECOMMENDATION:
That report CR629/2016 George Avenue and Ypres Street Petition BE RECEIVED for
information.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
At the October 3, 2016 meeting of Council, the following resolution was adopted:
CR629/2016
“That the petition presented by Councillor Sleiman from
residents on George Avenue asking the City to install 4 way
stop signs on George and Ypres stating that school buses
pick up and drop school children at this intersection and
speeders do not care for the safety of the children
BE RECEIVED by the Clerk and the Clerk BE DIRECTED to
forward the petition to the City Engineer for the purpose of
an examination of the requested works or undertakings; and
further that a report BE PROVIDED consistent with the
direction provided.”
Page 1 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 73 of 129

This report responds to this motion. The petition described in the motion is attached as
Appendix 1.
Previous Council Direction
At the July 6, 2015 meeting of Council, Administration was directed by Council (motion
M240-2015) to review a resident request for an all-way stop at George Avenue and
Ypres Street. In response to this direction, Administration reviewed the request and
found that the intersection of George Avenue and Ypres Street did not meet the warrant
for an all-way stop established in the All-Way Stop Policy.
These findings were presented in a report (report S 42/2015) to the Environment,
Transportation & Public Safety Standing Committee at its January 20, 2016 meeting.
The Committee recommended that the report be received for information (ETPS Report
334); this recommendation was adopted by Council at its March 7, 2016 meeting
(CR132/2016).

DISCUSSION:
A Council resolution has already been made on the matter of an all-way stop request at
George Avenue and Ypres Street (CR132/2016). CR629/2016 is redundant and cannot
be addressed by Administration at this time. If a member of Council so chooses,
procedurally, they could give notice at “notice of motion” stage of a Council meeting, to
allow for this matter to be reconsidered. If the motion to reconsider is successful, it
would allow for the matter to be heard and for Council to propose new direction as
opposed to the previously approved recommendation of receiving the report for
information only.

RISK ANALYSIS:
Risks associated with the all-way stop request were considered in the previous report (S
42/2015). If Administration were aware of changed conditions surrounding a particular
intersection that had an impact on an all-way stop warrant review, the warrant review
would be undertaken.
If applicable, Council would then be provided this new
information in the form of a Council report for their consideration.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
N/A

CONSULTATIONS:
Steve Vlachodimos, Council Services

Page 2 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 74 of 129

CONCLUSION:
A Council resolution has already been made on the matter of an all-way stop request at
George Avenue and Ypres Street (CR132/2016) confirming that this location does not
meet warrant.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Josette Eugeni

Manager of Transportation Planning

Steve Vlachodimos

Deputy City Clerk / Senior Manager,
Council Services

Dwayne Dawson

Executive Director of Operations

Valerie Critchley

City Clerk

Mark Winterton

City Engineer

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

Councillor Sleiman
Petition signatories
APPENDICES:
1 Resident Petition

Page 3 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 75 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 76 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 77 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 78 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 79 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 80 of 129

Item No. 8.1
Public Works - Operations
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 9/2017
Author’s Contact:
Wade Bondy
Contracts Coordinator
(519) 255-6560 ext. 4234
wbondy@citywindsor.ca
Ward 6
PW#7090

Report Date: 1/11/2017
Date to Council: 2/06/2017
Clerk’s File #: SW/12582

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: 2016 Cold Milling & Asphalt Paving II - Tender No. 145-16

RECOMMENDATION:
I.

THAT the following low tender BE ACCEPTED:

Tenderer:

Coco Paving Inc.
485 Little Baseline Road
Tecumseh, ON N8N 2L9

Work:

2016 Cold Milling & Asphalt Paving II
Tender 145-16.

Total Tendered
Price:

$664,940.00 (excluding HST)

Accounts
Charged:

2016 Capital Budget Project ID 7161054

AND THAT the Chief Administrative Officer and City Clerk BE AUTHORIZED to
sign a contract with the low tenderer (Coco Paving Inc.), satisfactory in form to the City
Solicitor, in technical content to the City Engineer, and in financial content to the Chief
Financial Officer and City Treasurer, for Tender No.145-16.
II.
THAT APPROVAL BE GIVEN to transfer funding up to $376,643 from the
approved 2016 Capital Budget for City Wide Road Rehabilitation (Project ID 7161027)
to Project ID 7161054 to fund work under Tender 145-16.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A
Page 1 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 81 of 129

BACKGROUND:
Council Resolution 563/2016 approved funding in the amount of $300,000 for the cold
milling and asphalt paving of Wyandotte Street East from Watson Avenue to Riverdale
Avenue. Upon reviewing pavement conditions in the area, the scope of work was
expanded to take advantage of economy of scale.

DISCUSSION:
The following tenders were received and opened on October 12, 2016:
TENDERED AMOUNT
(excluding H.S.T.)

TENDERER
Coco Paving Inc.
485 Little Baseline Road
Tecumseh, ON N8N 2L9

$664,940

MillAm Corporation
2199 Blackacre Drive
Oldcastle, ON N0R 1L0

$676,348

The tenders submitted were reviewed and no errors, informalities or omissions were
found.

RISK ANALYSIS:
Associated risks to the Corporation resulting from the undertaking of this project include
risks typical of a construction project, such as bodily injury, property damage, and
matters arising from violations of the Occupational Health and Safety Act. These risks
are to be transferred to the successful proponent, through the contract that the City and
Coco Paving Inc. enter into. As part of the contract with Coco Paving Inc., there are
sufficient insurances in place to cover the Corporation for the potential damage and
claims that might arise from their work during or after construction in the maintenance
period of time.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
The total amount to be expensed for work carried out under Tender 145-16 is $676,643
($664,940 + unrecoverable HST).
Summary of Costs, Recoveries, and Budget:
Tender 145-16 Value
Add: Unrecoverable HST
Total Tender 145-16 Cost

$ 664,940
$ 11,703
$ 676,643

Approved funding CR563/2016 (7161054)

$ 300,000

Maximum amount to be transferred from
2016 City Wide Road Rehabilitation (7161027)
Available Funding

$ 376,643
$ 676,643

Page 2 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 82 of 129

As outlined in the summary above, there are sufficient uncommitted funds remaining in
the 2016 City Wide Road Rehabilitation Program (Project ID 7161027) to fund the
balance of this work.

CONSULTATIONS:
Cindy Becker, Financial Planning Administrator, Public Works – Operations

CONCLUSION:
Administration recommends proceeding with the award of this tender and the
associated work.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

APPROVALS:
Name
Wade Bondy
Phong Nguy

Title
Contracts Coordinator
Manager, Contracts, Field Services &
Maintenance
Financial Planning Administrator
Executive Director of Operations
Purchasing Manager
City Solicitor
Chief Financial Officer
City Engineer
Chief Administrative Officer

Cindy Becker
Dwayne Dawson
Alex Vucinic
Shelby Askin Hager
Joe Mancina
Mark Winterton
Onorio Colucci

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:

Page 3 of 3
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 83 of 129

Item No. 8.2
Public Works - Operations
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 13/2017
Author’s Contact:
Andrew Lewis
Research Analyst Coordinator
(519) 255-6560 ext. 4229
alewis@citywindsor.ca
Ward 5
PW#7092

Report Date: 1/16/2017
Date to Council: 02/06/2017
Clerk’s File #: SW/12743

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Sanitary Trunk Sewer Inspection - RFP 151-16

RECOMMENDATION:
THAT the Chief Administrative Officer and the City Clerk BE AUTHORIZED to sign a
contract with M.E. Andrews and Associates Limited for an upset limit of $389,576 (not
including HST), satisfactory in form to the City Solicitor, in technical content to the City
Engineer and in financial content to the City Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer for
the inspection of trunk sanitary sewers in the west and south sections of the City of
Windsor.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
Approval of the 2016 Capital Budget included funding into the Flooding Abatement
Measures Project, Project ID 7169001. Part of this funding allows the Public Works
Department to undertake various projects that relate to the inspection of the City of
Windsor’s sewer system including the trunk sanitary sewer mains.
On October 15, 2016 RFP 151-16 was issued for the inspection of two (2) sections of
the City of Windsor’s trunk sanitary sewer system and a total of two (2) submissions
were received from the following companies:


M.E. Andrews and Associates Limited



D.M. Robichaud Associates Ltd.
Page 1 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 84 of 129

DISCUSSION:
Of the two (2) proposals submitted for RFP 151-16 and in accordance to the City of
Windsor’s Purchasing By-Law, Administration recommends the proposal submitted by
M.E. Andrews and Associates Limited which was the top scoring proposal to inspect the
sanitary trunk sewers and manholes. This proposal will inspect the Riverfront
Interceptor Section of sanitary trunk sewer from the Lou Romano Water Reclamation
Plant to the CMH Woods Pumping Station at Caron Avenue and Riverside Drive West.
It will also inspect the Western Trunk Section of sanitary trunk sewer from the Lou
Romano Water Reclamation Plant to the intersection of Northway Avenue at the Grand
Marais Drain where two (2) sub-trunk sewers meet. This inspection also includes all the
manholes within these limits that provide access to the sanitary trunk sewer system.

RISK ANALYSIS:
The risk analysis for the inspection of the sanitary trunk sewers using the Enterprise
Risk Management tool found the risk level to be significant should the inspection not be
undertaken. The inspection of the sanitary trunk sewers is part of a mitigation strategy
to assist in the prevention of possible large scale basement flooding and the potential
discharge of raw sewage into the Detroit River should the sanitary trunk sewer system
fail. This mitigation strategy would help to reduce the significant risk as the City
Engineer would know if problems exist, what are the problems that exist or what future
problems could potentially occur as these would be identified once the inspection is
completed. Once the inspection of this part of the sanitary trunk sewer system is
completed, a second mitigation strategy will have to be discussed to address the results
of the inspection. The responsibility of managing this risk falls to the City Engineer.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
Funding has been allocated for the sanitary trunk sewer inspection through the Flooding
Abatement Measures Project in the 2016 Capital Budget. As per RFP 151-16 and in
accordance with the City of Windsor Purchasing By-Law, M.E. Andrews and Associates
Limited has the highest score and lowest cost proposal and is the recommended
successful proponent for the inspection of the sanitary trunk sewer and manholes with
an upset limit amount of $389,576.00 plus HST.
There are sufficient funds in the project mentioned above to complete the requirements
set out in the RFP. Any issues identified during the inspection process will have to be
reviewed, and if required, a remedial action plan including any proposed funding
sources will then be reported back to Council for direction.

Page 2 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 85 of 129

Summary of Costs, Recoveries, and Budget:
RFP Value (151-16)

$

389,576

Add: Non-Recoverable HST

$

6,857

Total RFP Cost (151-16)

$

396,433

$

6,585,170

Add: Other Revenue Collected

$

134,400

Less: Expenses Paid to Date

$

2,585,955

Less: Outstanding Commitments

$

3,037,067

$

1,096,548

Total Life to Date Budget, Flood Abatement Program (7169001)

Balance of Funds Remaining, Flood Abatement Program (7169001)

As outlined in the summary above, there are sufficient uncommitted funds remaining in
the Flood Abatement Project 7169001 to fund the work under RFP 151-16. All costs
associated with RFP 151-16 will be charged to 007-2950-9998-14034-7169001 (Flood
Abatement Program – Small Sewer Repairs).

CONSULTATIONS:
Cindy Becker, Financial Planning Administrator – PW Operations

CONCLUSION:
In conclusion, of the proposals submitted for RFP 151-16 and in accordance with the
City of Windsor’s Purchasing By-Law, Administration recommends the highest scoring
proposal submitted by M.E. Andrews and Associates Limited be accepted to undertake
the sanitary trunk sewer and manhole inspection.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

Page 3 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 86 of 129

APPROVALS:
Name
A. Lewis
P. Nguy
C. Becker
D. Dawson
M. Osborne
J. Mancina
A. Vucinic
S. Askin Hager
M. Winterton
O. Colucci

Title
Research Analyst Coordinator
Manager, Contracts, Field Services & Maintenance
Financial Planning Administrator
Executive Director of Operations
Senior Manager of Asset Planning
Chief Financial Officer/City Treasurer
Purchasing Manager
City Solicitor
City Engineer
Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:

Page 4 of 4

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 87 of 129

Item No. 8.3
Environment, Transportationa and Public Safety Standing Committee
Meeting Held January 25, 2017

Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment - Filing the Notice of
Study Completion - Ward 9
Moved by: Councillor Payne
Seconded by: Councillor Francis
Decision Number: ETPS 470
I. THAT the report Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment – Filing
the Notice of Study Completion BE RECEIVED for information; and,
II. THAT Administration BE DIRECTED to issue the Notice of Study Completion for
the Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment
Carried.
Report No.: S 4/2017
Clerk’s File No: ZB/12244 ZP12271
(Administrative Report Attached which was
previously distributed as part of the
Standing Committee Agenda)

Page 1 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 88 of 129

Public Works - Operations
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: S 4/2017
Author’s Contact:
Patrick Winters
Development Engineer
519-255-6257 ext 6462

Report Date: 1/5/2017
Date to Council: January 25, 2017
Clerk’s File #: ZB/12244 ZP12271

Josette Eugeni
Manager of Transportation Planning
519-255-6248 ext 6418
To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment - Filing the
Notice of Study Completion - Ward 9

RECOMMENDATION:
I. THAT the report Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment – Filing
the Notice of Study Completion BE RECEIVED for information; and,
II. THAT Administration BE DIRECTED to issue the Notice of Study Completion for
the Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: N/A
BACKGROUND:
Under M382-2015, CR210/2015 and CR553/2016 Council has previously approved
conditions of draft approval and cost sharing measures for the Southwind Subdivision
by Tru Land Developments. The subdivision is proposed to be comprised of 119
townhome units to be constructed south of existing Woodlawn and Parkwood Streets,
and west of the existing Devonshire Heights Community.
Construction of the subdivision requires the extension of Kamloops Street from the
existing dead end on the 1200 Block westerly to Marentette Avenue. The extension of
the roadway is subject to the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment process and
Page 2 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 89 of 129

as such following previous Council approvals it was determined that an Environment
Assessment (EA) Study needed to be undertaken.
The study area considered during the completion of the Kamloops EA is generally
bound by Marentette Avenue to the west, Calderwood Avenue to the east, and the north
and south property limits of the Southwind Subdivision which consist of the south
property limits of the existing Woodlawn and Parkwood Avenues to the north, and the
Windsor Grove Cemetery lands to the south.

Study Area
The purpose of the study was to establish the preferred design and cross-section for the
extension of Kamloops Street from Marentette Avenue easterly through the Southwind
Subdivision to the existing intersection at Calderwood Avenue.
Public consultation is an important part of the EA process. Project related information
and updates have been maintained on the project website throughout the study
(www.windsoreas.ca). Public meetings were held on October 5 th and 24th , 2016 in
order to present the preferred road design to the public, highlight anticipated traffic
operations following implementation of the planned upgrades, and to consult and
receive feedback from the public, agencies and stakeholders.
Page 3 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 90 of 129

The report is now complete. The next step is to publish the Notice of Study Completion
and commence the 30 day public review period.

DISCUSSION:
The Kamloops Street Extension Environmental Assessment has been carried out in
accordance with Schedule B requirements under the Municipal Class Environmental
Assessment process, and as such the study completed phases 1 and 2 as outlined.

Schedule B Process for Class EAs
The preferred design for the Kamloops Street extension comprises the following:







10.4m pavement width
3.3m travel lanes
1.5m bike lanes with 0.4m painted buffers
1.5m sidewalks on both sides of the road
Construction of a new, northbound right turn lane on Marentette Avenue
Installation of all-way stop control at the intersection of Kamloops Street and
Calderwood Avenue
Page 4 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 91 of 129

Recommended Cross-Section
The preferred alternative cross section extends between Marentette Avenue and
Calderwood Avenue. The existing 100m section of Kamloops Street is recommended
to be widened to match the proposed new construction in order to connect the buffered
bike lanes on Kamloops to the existing signed route on Calderwood Avenue. This will
also facilitate neighbourhood access to the existing Transit Route on Marentette Avenue
and allow for future expansion of Transit services into the neighbourhood if desired.
As mentioned, the next step in the EA process requires the publication of the Notice of
Study Completion. Upon authorization by Council, the Notice of Study Completion will
be:




Published in the Windsor Star on the Saturday and Wednesday immediately
following Council Approval.
Mailed to those whom have requested to be included on the project contact list
for the EA.
Mailed to relative Agencies and Stakeholders, and
Page 5 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 92 of 129



Posted on the Project Website [www.WindsorEAs.ca].

A copy of the draft notice is provided as Appendix 1 of this report.
The EA report will be available for review during the 30-calendar day review period on
the project website www.windsoreas.ca as well as at the following locations: the City of
Windsor Clerks Office, the Remington Park Branch of the Windsor Public Library, and
the City of Windsor Public Works Office (detailed display location information is
provided on the Notice of Study Completion).

RISK ANALYSIS:
No significant or critical risks are associated with this report. The recommendation
requires a mandatory 30-day review period which provides an opportunity for the public
to request a Part II Order regarding the proposed undertaking identified in the EA. In
the event an objection is filed, the Minister of the Environment will undertake a review
and render a decision which may deny with or without conditions, refer the matter to
mediation, or require the proponent to comply with Part II of the EA Act.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
The EA study was completed in-house by City of Windsor staff with required
background studies being provided by parties retained by Tru Land Developments. As
such, there are no budgetary costs directly attributable to the completion of the study.
Implementation of construction identified under the EA will be the joint responsibility of
the City of Windsor and Tru Land Developments. Council has previously approved the
City’s portion of the construction costs under CR553/2016 [Southwind Subdivision Cost
Sharing]. The total value of work to be undertaken in relation to the EA [Costs to both
the City and Developer] is estimated to be approximately $2,000,000.
It should be noted that the widening of the existing section of Kamloops Street was not
included under CR553/2016. This work is estimated to cost $69,000. As per report
C187/2016 and in accordance with Council Direction (CR 625/2016) provided, the City
of Windsor has made a Public Transit Infrastructure Fund (PTIF) grant application which
includes this work and which would cover a portion of these costs. The application
results are pending.
Following finalization of the EA, one tender will be issued for all of the work required to
be completed by the City. Administration may need to request additional funding
following the closing of the tender should the total value of the new scope of work
exceed the budget established under CR553/2016.
Page 6 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 93 of 129

CONSULTATIONS:
Various City Departments were involved in the overall study process including
Engineering – Development, Transportation Planning, Planning, and Legal.
Michael Dennis, Financial Planning Administrator – Engineering was consulted in
regards to the contents of this report.

CONCLUSION:
Upon receiving authorization from Council, the Notice of Study Completion will be
published in the Windsor Star, on the Project Website, and will be provided to those
whom have requested to be included on the project contact list for the EA. The Study
Report will be made available at City Hall in the Clerk’s office, the Public Works office,
and the Remington Park Branch of the Windsor Public Library (2710 Lillian Avenue,
Windsor, Ontario, N8X 4B5).

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Patrick Winters

Development Engineer

Josette Eugeni

Manager of Transportation Planning

Dwayne Dawson

Executive Director of Operations

Shelby Askin-Hager

City Solicitor and Corporate Leader –
Environmental Protection & Infrastructure
Services

Mark Winterton

City Engineer and Corporate Leader –
Environmental Protection & Infrastructure
Services

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

Page 7 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 94 of 129

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

J. Murray Troup

100-4747 Pleasant Place, jmt@wintru.com
Windsor, ON, N8Y 2K6

RC Spencer Associates Inc. 261 Shepherd Street East, rcspencer@rcspencer.ca
Attn: Rick Spencer
Windsor, ON, N8X 2K6
Those
whom
have
requested to be included on
the project contact list for the
EA
Agencies and Stakeholders

APPENDICES:
1) Draft Notice of Study Completion – Kamloops Street Extension – from Marentette
Avenue to Calderwood Avenue.

Page 8 of 8

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 95 of 129

NOTICE OF STUDY COMPLETION
KAMLOOPS STREET EXTENSION CLASS ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
THE STUDY
The City of Windsor in conjunction with Tru Land Developments has completed a Class Environmental
Assessment Study ‘Schedule B’ in accordance the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (EA) process for
the extension of Kamloops Street from Marentette Avenue easterly through the Southwind Subdivision to
Calderwood Avenue.
THE PURPOSE
The purpose of the study was to establish the preferred design, and cross -section for the extension of Kamloops
Street from Marentette Avenue easterly
through the Southwind Subdivision to the
existing intersection at Calderwood Avenue.
THE PROCESS
The study was completed in accordance
with the planning and design process for
‘Schedule B’ projects of the Municipal Class
Environmental Assessment (October 2000,
as amended in 2007, 2011, & 2015) under
the Ontario Environmental Assessment Act.
PUBLIC INPUT
As part of the EA Study, Public Meetings
th
th
were held on October 5 , and 24 2016.
Based on input received the Project Team
has reached a preferred alternative and
documented decisions in a project file.
STUDY REPORT
By this notice, the findings of the study have been placed on the public record for review in accordance with the
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment process.
Subject to comments received as a result of this Notice, the City may proceed with implementation of the
recommended improvements in the study area.
DOCUMENT REVIEW
A printed copy of the Study Report will be available for a 30-day public and agency review from February XX,
2017 to March XX, 2017 at:
Windsor City Hall – Council Services
350 City Hall Square W., 2 nd Floor
Windsor, ON, N9A 6S1
(519)255-6222

City of Windsor Library
Remington Park Branch
2710 Lillian Avenue,
Windsor, ON, N8X 4B5
(519)255-6770

Public Works – Operations
1266 McDougall Street,
Windsor, ON, N8X 3M7
(519)255-6248

A digital version of the Study Report will also be available on the City of Windsor web site at
http://www.windsoreas.ca.
If concerns regarding this project cannot be resolved in discussions with the City of Windsor, a person or party
may request the Minister of the Environment and Climate Change to make an order for the project to comply with
Part II of the Environmental Assessment Act which addresses individual environmental assessments. Requests
for a Part II Order must be received by the Ministry at the addresses below, no later than March XX, 2017. The
request to the Ministry must also be copied to the City’s Manager of Transportation Planning identified below. If
no request is received, the City of Windsor intends to proceed with designing the planned improvements.
Minister of the Environment and
Climate Change
77 Wellesley Street West 11 th Floor,
Toronto, ON, M7A 2T5

Director, Environmental Approvals
Branch Ministry of the Environment
and Climate Change
135 St Clair Ave West, 1 st Floor
Toronto, ON, M4V 1P5
EEASIBgen@ontario.ca

This Notice First Posted: February XX, 2017.
COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 96 of 129

Josette Eugeni
City
of
Windsor
Manager
of
Transportation Planning
1266 McDougall Street, Windsor, ON
N8X 3M7
jeugeni@citywindsor.ca

Item No. 11.1
Legal Services, Real Estate &
Risk Management
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 12/2017
Author’s Contact:
Patrick T. Brode
Senior Legal Counsel
(519) 255-6100 x6377
pbrode@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/13/2017
Date to Council: February 6, 2017
Clerk’s File #: SW/10746

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Proposed Expropriation of Land for the Phase I, Cabana/Division
Corridor Improvements Project
City Wide

RECOMMENDATION:
Usually, the administration makes a recommendation on the issue before Council. But
in the case of an expropriation, the sole discretion to be made is by City Council on
whether or not to proceed. Should Council wish to proceed, the following wording could
be used:

“That the City Council of the City of Windsor acting as an approving authority
under the Expropriations Act hereby resolves to expropriate the lands described
in Schedule “B” hereto and authorizes the CAO and the City Clerk to execute the
necessary Expropriation Plan and register the same on title, as well as the
Certificate of Approval, section 25 Offers to Settle, and all other necessary
documents.”

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

Page 1 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 97 of 129

BACKGROUND:
The Cabana/Division Corridor Improvements have been the subject of previous Council
reports and approvals. Essentially the work entails road widening for Cabana, re-paving
much of the existing roadway and providing for turning lanes. Council has previously
authorized the City Solicitor to initiate expropriation proceedings to obtain the required
road widenings from nine adjacent owners.
The Notices of Application for Approval to Expropriate (Schedule “A”) were served on all
the Owners and a copy served with the City Clerk on behalf of the Approving Authority,
the Council of the City of Windsor. Notices were also published three times in the local
newspaper.
The time period for requesting a Hearing of Necessity into whether or not the taking is
fair, sound and reasonably necessary has passed.
During the interval, the City has come to an agreement with two of the Owners and it
will not be necessary to expropriate those sites. One owner has requested a Hearing of
Necessity. The remaining six Owners are as shown in Schedule “B.” A description of the
lands taken from them is as shown on 12R-26819, 12R-26820, 12R-26821 and 12R26822 which are attached as Schedule “C.”

DISCUSSION:
It is submitted that the taking of these lands are necessary for the Cabana Road project.
In expropriation cases, City Council sits as an “approving authority” to determine under
section 8(1) of the Act whether to approve the taking, approve it with modifications, or
not to take the land at all.

RISK ANALYSIS:
These lands are required as part of the Cabana/Division Corridor Improvements Project.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
Council approved funding totalling $4,237,000 for the engineering, land acquisition and
construction of Cabana/Division Corridor Improvements from east of Howard Avenue to
west of Provincial Road (Project I.D. # 7152001).
Currently the project has a $4 million balance available. Administration is confident that
there are sufficient funds remaining in the project to cover these costs.
Page 2 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 98 of 129

CONSULTATIONS:
Mike Dennis, Financial Planning Administrator
Mark DiPasquale, Financial Planning Administrator
Jane Z. He, Engineer III, Engineering Department

CONCLUSION:
Acting as an approving authority, City Council may make whatever decision it feels
appropriate. If it desires to proceed with the taking, wording has been provided in the
recommendation.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Patrick T. Brode

Senior Legal Counsel

Shelby Askin Hager

City Solicitor

Joe Mancina

Chief Financial Officer

Mark Winterton

City Engineer

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:
1 Schedule A-Notice of Application for Approval to Expropriate Land
2 Schedule B-List of Owners and Properties
3 Schedule C-Plans 12R-26819,12R-26820, Plan 12R-26821 and 12R-26822

Page 3 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 99 of 129

Form 2
Expropriations Act
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL TO EXPROPRIATE LAND

IN THE MATTER OF an application by The Corporation of the City of Windsor
for approval to expropriate land being shown on Schedule "A" attached, all in the City of
Windsor, County of Essex for the purposes of Cabana/Division Corridor Improvements
Project (Phase I).
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that application has been made for approval to
expropriate the land described as follows:
On Schedule "A" attached hereto.

Any owner of lands in respect of which notice is given who desires an inquiry into
whether the taking of such land is fair, sound and reasonably necessary in the
achievement of the objectives of the expropriating authority shall so notify the approving
authority in writing,
(a)

in case of a registered owner, served personally or by
registered mail within thirty days after the registered owner is
serviced with the notice, or, when the registered owner is
served by publication, within thirty days after the first
publication of the notice;

(b)

in the case of an owner who is not a registered owner, within
thirty days after the first publication of the notice.

The approving authority is:
The City Council of the City of Windsor
City Hall, P. O. Box 1607
350 City Hall Square West
Windsor, Ontario
N9A 6S1
Name of expropriating authority:
The Corporation of the City of Windsor

Per:
Shelby Askin Hager
City Solicitor

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 100 of 129

SCHEDULE “B”

1. 3840 Howard Avenue Inc.
Part of Lots 67, 68 & 69, Plan 1259, being Parts 1 to 4 on Plan 12R-26820
2. Shirley-Lyn and Richard Watson
Part of Lot 2, Plan 1552, being Part 4 on Plan 12R-26822
3. Tracey Lyn Beaugrand
Part of Lot 88, Conc. 3, being Part 1 on Plan 12R-26819
4. Wade Jack Ford
Part of Lot 88, Conc. 3, being Part 2 on Plan 12R-26819
5. Willie and Eiko Lee
Part of Lot 34, Plan 1552, being Part 4 on Plan 12R-26821
6. Eleni and Constantinos Spanos
Part of Lot 35, Plan 1552, being Part 5 on Plan 12R-26821

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 101 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 102 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 103 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 104 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 105 of 129

Item No. 11.2
Legal Services, Real Estate &
Risk Management
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 15/2017
Author’s Contact:
Shelby Askin Hager
City Solicitor
519-255-6100 ext 6424
shager@citywindsor.ca

Report Date: 1/16/2017
Date to Council: February 6, 2017
Clerk’s File #: SR2017

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Roseland Golf & Curling Club Limited - Annual General Meeting
City Wide

RECOMMENDATION:
I

That Council, acting as the shareholder for Roseland Golf & Curling Club Limited
(“Roseland”) APPROVE the resolutions presented by Roseland in the attached
Report of the Board; and,

II.

That the Mayor BE APPOINTED to sign the resolutions on behalf of The
Corporation of the City of Windsor, in accordance with Council direction, with
respect to the annual general meeting of Roseland for the year 2016.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
N/A

BACKGROUND:
The City is the sole shareholder of Roseland. As a corporation subject to the Ontario
Business Corporations Act (“OBCA”), Roseland is required to obtain certain shareholder
resolutions on an annual basis. This is generally accomplished at an annual general
meeting (“AGM”).
As the shareholder, the City (represented by City Council) must appoint someone to
sign the resolutions in accordance with its direction. Therefore this report seeks that
Page 1 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 106 of 129

Council approve the resolutions presented by Roseland, and further that it appoints the
Mayor as the City’s signing delegate.

DISCUSSION:
The resolutions presented at an AGM are prescribed by the legislation and include:
(a) Approval of minutes of prior AGMs (if any);
(b) Receipt of financial statements;
(c) Appointment of officers.
Any other business intended to be transacted at an AGM is considered “special
business”. Roseland has not circulated any proposed special business; accordingly, the
resolutions required are essentially annual housekeeping.
It is Administration’s opinion that it is appropriate to approve the resolutions presented.

RISK ANALYSIS:
As the sole shareholder of Roseland, the City must fulfill its obligations under the OBCA
and address the resolutions presented by Roseland.
Approval of the resolutions pose little to no risk to the City as the City remains involved
and aware with respect to the operations of Roseland.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
There are no financial ramifications to accepting the resolutions presented by Roseland.

CONSULTATIONS:
Kate Tracey – Legal Counsel to Roseland Golf & Curling Club Limited
Dan Seguin – Treasurer to Roseland Golf & Curling Club Limited

CONCLUSION:
The resolutions presented by Roseland are essentially corporate housekeeping and it is
appropriate to approve them. In order to for the resolutions to be signed, it is necessary
to appoint a delegate to represent the City for that purpose.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

Page 2 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 107 of 129

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Shelby Askin Hager

City Solicitor

Joseph Mancina

City Treasurer

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:
Name

Address

Email

Phil Roberts

proberts@citywindsor.ca

Karen Kadour

kkadour@citywindsor.ca

Dan Seguin

dseguin@citywindsor.ca

Kate Tracey

ktracey@citywindsor.ca

APPENDICES:
1 Appendix A - Report of the Board

Page 3 of 3

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 108 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 109 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 110 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 111 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 112 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 113 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 114 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 115 of 129

Item No. 11.3
Asset Planning
MISSION STATEMENT
“Our City is built on relationships – between citizens and their government, businesses and public institutions, city
and region – all interconnected, mutually supportive, and focused on the brightest future we can create together”

REPORT #: C 1/2017
Author’s Contact:
Melissa Osborne
Senior Manager Asset Planning
mosborne@citywindsor.ca
519-255-6100 x6111

Report Date: 1/3/2017
Date to Council: 2/6/2017
Clerk’s File #: GFG/12228

To: Mayor and Members of City Council
Subject: Canada 150 & Ontario 150 Grant Responses

RECOMMENDATION:
THAT Council RECEIVE FOR INFORMATION the following updates in relation to
various grant applications that have been made:
i)

The City has been successful in FedDev Ontario Canada 150 Community
Infrastructure Program (CIP 150) grant applications totalling $1,044,308 in
funding for Dieppe River Walk, Willistead Manor, Gino and Liz Marcus
Community Complex Accessible Family Change Room and the Windsor
Loop and;

ii)

The City has been successful in receiving the Ontario 150 Community
Celebration Program (Ontario 150 CCP) grant application totalling
$55,000 in funding for the Open Streets Windsor – Ontario 150 Edition
and;

iii)

The City has been successful in receiving the Building Communities
Through the Arts and Heritage (BCAH) grant application totalling $69,900
in funding for the City of Windsor 125th Birthday and;

THAT Council CONFIRM the use of $94,400 in previously approved funding for the
125th and 150th Birthday Celebrations as the City’s required contribution of $19,400 and
$75,000 to the Ontario 150 CCP and BCAH respectively and;
THAT the Chief Administrative Officer and City Clerk BE AUTHORIZED to sign and
enter into a contribution agreement for funding under the Canada 150 Community

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 116 of 129

Infrastructure Program (CIP 150) totaling $1,044,308, with $250,000 relating to the
Improvement of Accessibility of the Dieppe River Walk, $450,000 for the Improvement
of Willistead Manor, $218,308 for the Expansion of Gino and Liz Marcus Community
Complex to Include an Accessible Family Change Room and $126,000 for the
Expansion and Rehabilitation of Windsor LOOP Cycling Network Multi-use Trail, AND
FURTHER that they BE AUTHORIZED to take any other such action required to bring
effect to the awarded grants for the FedDev Ontario Canada 150 Community
Infrastructure Program (CIP 150), as it relates to these projects, satisfactory in legal
form to the City Solicitor, in technical content to the City Engineer and in financial
content to City Treasurer and
THAT the Chief Administrative Officer and City Clerk BE AUTHORIZED to sign and
enter into agreements for funding under the Ontario 150 Community Celebration
Program ($55,000) and the Building Communities Through Arts and Heritage Grant
($69,900), as it relates to the projects identified above, satisfactory in legal form to the
City Solicitor, in technical content to the Executive Director of Recreation and Culture
and in financial content to City Treasurer.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:

BACKGROUND:
On August 2, 2016 Administration brought to Council report C126/2016 requesting
confirmation of the submission for 6 projects to the Ontario Fed Dev Canada 150
Community Infrastructure Program (CIP 150). The projects submitted were Willistead
Manor, Sandwich Library, Accessible Playgrounds, Dieppe River Walk, Gino and Liz
Marcus Community Complex Accessible Family Change Room and Windsor Loop. The
report also identified the funding strategy for the projects and the requested precommitments necessary should the projects be selected for grant funding. The report
and all recommendations were approved CR498/2016.
All Canada 150 projects were submitted by the deadline of 5pm on June 24, 2016.
On December 21, 2015 Council approved report 18053 (B26-2015) requesting approval
to submit to any grant funding available to support the 125 th and 150th Birthday
Celebrations. The report also pre-committed funding in the amount of $40,000 in 2016
and $85,000 in 2017 to allow for any matching funding. Administration proceeded to
submit the following grants; Ontario 150 Community Celebration Program – Project Title
Open Streets Windsor Ontario 150 Edition and Building Communities through Arts and
Heritage Grant – Project Title City of Windsor 125 th Birthday.

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 117 of 129

DISCUSSION:
Ontario Fed Dev Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program (CIP 150)
Official notifications for the FedDev Ontario CIP 150 program were issued the week of
December 26th, 2016. The City of Windsor was notified that 4 of the 6 submitted
projects were selected for grant funding. Letters of notification for each project can be
found in Appendices A through D.
The contribution agreement was received on January 19 th, 2017. It should be noted
that the contribution agreement is pending at this time for the four projects.
Below is a chart outlining the funding for each project selected.
GINO & LIZ
MARCUS
(#809555)

BUDGET ESTIMATE

WINDSOR
LOOP
(#809668)

DIEPPE
RIVER WALK
(#809551)

WILLISTEAD
(#809553)

City Funding
Approved Capital Budget funding prior
to 2017

260,000

Pre-Commitment of 2019 PFO-001-14

750,000

500,000

Approved 2017 Capital Budget
Funding

750,000

Pre-Commitment of 2019 REC-005-16
TOTAL CITY FUNDING
Awarded Canada 150 Grant funding
TOTAL FUNDING

1,100,000
1,100,000

260,000

500,000

1,500,000

218,308

126,000

250,000

450,000

1,318,308

386,000

750,000

1,950,000

All projects received the full amount of funding requested with the exception of the Gino
and Liz Marcus Centre project. The grant application requested $252,000 in grant
funding and we received $218,308, a difference of $33,692. This is related to some
expenses which were deemed as ineligible and therefore removed from the total
funding. The two projects not selected were Sandwich Library and Accessible
Playgrounds which requested $387,000 and $200,000 in funding, respectively.
Council report C126/2016 approved the pre-commitment of funding necessary for the
grant, pending a successful result. Since that meeting on August 2, 2016 reports for the
Gino and Liz Marcus Centre project and Dieppe River Walk, S94/2016 and C229/2016
respectively, came forward requesting that despite the results of FedDev Ontario CIP

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 118 of 129

150 that funding be committed to allow the projects to commence. These reports were
approved via CR512/2016 and CR738/2016.

Based on all of these approvals the following funding in the 2017 5 year Capital Budget
is committed for the following projects:
Capital Project ID

Project

Year of Funding

Amount of Funding

PFO-001-14

Dieppe River Walk

2019

$500,000

HCP-010-07

Willistead

2017

$750,000

REC-005-16

Gino and Liz Marcus

2020

$1,100,000

The assessment process for the applications, as defined in the FedDev Ontario CIP 150
Guidelines, looks at the following elements: Project Readiness, Project Scope, Extent to
which other funding is leveraged, Extent to which project support a clean growth
economy, Link to Canada 150th Anniversary and Incrementality.
Applicants were required to attest to the incrementality component in conjunction with
the project application. This attestation essentially confirms that the work to be
undertaken is an incremental construction activity that would not otherwise have been
constructed or constructed as quickly, were it not for funding from CIP 150.
All projects selected for this grant attested that the work identified was either new work
not feasible without the funding from CIP 150 and or allowed the project to proceed
sooner than expected. As such, these grants do not result in any capital funding being
freed up for use on other projects.

Ontario 150 Community Celebration & Building Communities through Arts &
Heritage Grants
Official notification for the Ontario 150 Community Celebration Program was received
January 20, 2017 advising that the city’s Open Streets Windsor – Ontario 150 Edition
was selected, Appendix E – Ontario 150 Community Celebration Letter. The grant will
provide $55,000 in funding and requires a city contribution of $19,400 from the
previously approved funding, B26-2015. It should be noted that the Third Party

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 119 of 129

Administration (TPA) documentation is pending at this time for the ‘Open Streets
Windsor – Ontario 150 Edition’ project.
The City also received notification of their successful application to the Building
Communities through Arts & Heritage Grants for the City of Windsor 125 th Birthday,
Appendix F – BCAH – Approval Letter for Windsor. The grant will provide $69,900 in
funding and requires a city contribution of $75,000.
It should be noted that
documentation is pending at this time for the ‘City of Windsor 125 th Birthday’ project.

Below is a chart outlining the funding for the selected projects:
BUDGET ESTIMATE

Open Streets

City of Windsor
125th

$19,400

$20,600

City Funding
Approved Capital Budget Funding 2016
Approved Capital Budget Funding 2017

$54,400

TOTAL CITY FUNDING

$19,400

$75,000

Grant Funding

$55,000

$69,900

TOTAL EVENT FUNDING

$74,400

$144,900

RISK ANALYSIS:
While all projects selected for the Ontario Fed Dev CIP 150 are expected to be
completed on or before March 31, 2018 there is always a risk of unknown factors
impacting and delaying a project. If this were to incur the City may need to refund some
or all of the grant for that project and the total cost would then be the responsibility of
the City. This is considered a minimal risk because several of the projects have started
and are being properly resourced and planned.
There is a minimal risk that grant funds may not be provided due claims for
reimbursements not meeting the requirements outlined in the respective grant
submission processes.

FINANCIAL MATTERS:
As stated previously the City has been awarded $1,044,308 in grant funding from CIP
150 for Willistead Manor, Gino and Liz Marcus Accessible Family Change Room,

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 120 of 129

Windsor Loop and Dieppe River Walk. These funds along with the City’s identified
contribution of $3,360,000 result in $4,404,308 in total funds to complete these four
projects.
There are two projects, Gino and Liz Marcus and Dieppe River Walk which required a
pre-commitment of funding beyond 2017 for $1,100,000 and $500,000 respectively.
Appropriate interest charges will be applied to these projects.
The funding for the Ontario 150 CCP and BCAH grants were previously approved by
Council B26-20015, which allocated $125,000 for the 125th and 150th birthday
celebrations. The city’s contribution for the approved grants as noted above will be
$94,400 leaving a remaining amount of $30,600 in funding which can be utilized for
additional 125th and 150th celebration costs.

CONSULTATIONS:
Tom Graziano- Senior Manager Facilities
Mike Clement- Manager Parks Development
Dwayne Dawson- Executive Director Operations
Vic Ferranti – Manager of Capital Budget & Reserves
Val Clifford – FPA – Recreation and Culture
Josie Gualtieri – FPA – Facility Operations
Cindy Becker – FPA - PW Operations
Christopher Menard – Communications and Events Coordinator
Cathy Masterson – Manager of Cultural Affairs

CONCLUSION:
It is recommended that Council approve resolutions allowing all necessary documents
required to receive the CIP 150, Ontario 150 CCP and BCAH grant funding to be
executed.

PLANNING ACT MATTERS:
N/A

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 121 of 129

APPROVALS:
Name

Title

Natasha Couvillon

Manager Performance
Financial Administration

Melissa Osborne

Senior Manager of Asset Planning

Mark Winterton

City Engineer

Jan Wilson for Jelena Payne

Commissioner Development & Health

Joe Mancina

Chief Financial Officer, City Treasurer

Onorio Colucci

Chief Administrative Officer

NOTIFICATIONS:

Name

Address

Email

APPENDICES:
1 Appendix
2 Appendix
3 Appendix
4 Appendix
5 Appendix
6 Appendix

A - Dieppe River Walk Canada 150 Letter
B - Willistead Canada 150 Letter
C - Gino Marcus Canada 150 Letter
D - Windsor Loop Canada 150 Letter
E- Ontario 150 Community Celebration Program Letter
F - BCAH Approval Letter for Windsor

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 122 of 129

Management

&

Mr. Mike Clement
Manager, Parks Development
The Corporation of the City of Windsor
350 City Hall Square, Suite 201
Windsor, ON N9A 6S1
Re: Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program Project Application
#809551 - Improvement of Accessibility on the Dieppe River Walk
Dear Mr. Clement:
I am pleased to inform you that the Federal Economic Development Agency
for Southern Ontario (FedDev Ontario) has approved your application for
project funding under the Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program
(CIP 150).
Your CIP 150 project has been approved for a non-repayable contribution of
up to $250,000, representing 33% of total eligible project costs for the abovenoted project.
You will be contacted in the near future to complete the CIP 150 contribution
agreement for your project. This agreement will outline the contracting details,
claims information, and communication opportunities for your funded project.
Also, if you have not already submitted one with your application, a resolution
of your Council duly authorizing or endorsing your CIP 150 project must be
provided along with the signed contribution agreement. Please ensure that
the resolution demonstrates that it has been passed and references FedDev
Ontario, the CIP 150 contribution agreement, the CIP 150 project title, and the
approved CIP 150 funding amount.
Should you have any immediate questions, please feel free to contact
FedDev Ontario toll-free at 1-866-593-5505.
The FedDev Ontario team is looking forward to working with you on your
project.
Regards,
Frank Lofranco
Vice President
Business Innovation and Community Development
Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 123 of 129

Mr. Tom Graziano
Senior Manager, Facilities
The Corporation of the City of Windsor
350 City Hall Square, Suite 201
Windsor, ON N9A 6S1
Re: Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program Project Application
#809553 - Improvement of Willistead Manor
Dear Mr. Graziano:
I am pleased to inform you that the Federal Economic Development Agency
for Southern Ontario (FedDev Ontario) has approved your application for
project funding under the Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program
(CIP 150).
Your CIP 150 project has been approved for a non-repayable contribution of
up to $450,000, representing 23% of total eligible project costs for the abovenoted project.
You will be contacted in the near future to complete the CIP 150 contribution
agreement for your project. This agreement will outline the contracting details,
claims information, and communication opportunities for your funded project.
Also, if you have not already submitted one with your application, a resolution
of your Council duly authorizing or endorsing your CIP 150 project must be
provided along with the signed contribution agreement. Please ensure that
the resolution demonstrates that it has been passed and references FedDev
Ontario, the CIP 150 contribution agreement, the CIP 150 project title, and the
approved CIP 150 funding amount.
Should you have any immediate questions, please feel free to contact
FedDev Ontario toll-free at 1-866-593-5505.
The FedDev Ontario team is looking forward to working with you on your
project.
Regards,
Frank Lofranco
Vice President
Business Innovation and Community Development
Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 124 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 125 of 129

Ms. Jan Wilson
Executive Director, Recreation and Culture
The Corporation of the City of Windsor
350 City Hall Square, Suite 201
Windsor, ON N9A 6S1
Re: Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program Project Application
#809555 - Expansion of Gino and Liz Marcus Community Complex to Include
an Accessible Family Change Room
Dear Ms. Wilson:
I am pleased to inform you that the Federal Economic Development Agency
for Southern Ontario (FedDev Ontario) has approved your application for
project funding under the Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program
(CIP 150).
Your CIP 150 project has been approved for a non-repayable contribution of
up to $218,308, representing 19% of total eligible project costs for the abovenoted project.
You will be contacted in the near future to complete the CIP 150 contribution
agreement for your project. This agreement will outline the contracting details,
claims information, and communication opportunities for your funded project.
Also, if you have not already submitted one with your application, a resolution
of your Council duly authorizing or endorsing your CIP 150 project must be
provided along with the signed contribution agreement. Please ensure that
the resolution demonstrates that it has been passed and references FedDev
Ontario, the CIP 150 contribution agreement, the CIP 150 project title, and the
approved CIP 150 funding amount.
Should you have any immediate questions, please feel free to contact
FedDev Ontario toll-free at 1-866-593-5505.
The FedDev Ontario team is looking forward to working with you on your
project.
Regards,
Frank Lofranco
Vice President
Business Innovation and Community Development
Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 126 of 129

Mr. Dwayne Dawson
Executive Director, Operations
The Corporation of the City of Windsor
350 City Hall Square, Suite 201
Windsor, ON N9A 6S1
Re: Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program Project Application
#809668 - Expansion and Rehabilitation of Windsor LOOP Cycling Network
Multi-use Trail
Dear Mr. Dawson:
I am pleased to inform you that the Federal Economic Development Agency
for Southern Ontario (FedDev Ontario) has approved your application for
project funding under the Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program
(CIP 150).
Your CIP 150 project has been approved for a non-repayable contribution of
up to $126,000, representing 33% of total eligible project costs for the abovenoted project.
You will be contacted in the near future to complete the CIP 150 contribution
agreement for your project. This agreement will outline the contracting details,
claims information, and communication opportunities for your funded project.
Also, if you have not already submitted one with your application, a resolution
of your Council duly authorizing or endorsing your CIP 150 project must be
provided along with the signed contribution agreement. Please ensure that
the resolution demonstrates that it has been passed and references FedDev
Ontario, the CIP 150 contribution agreement, the CIP 150 project title, and the
approved CIP 150 funding amount.
Should you have any immediate questions, please feel free to contact
FedDev Ontario toll-free at 1-866-593-5505.
The FedDev Ontario team is looking forward to working with you on your
project.
Regards,
Frank Lofranco
Vice President
Business Innovation and Community Development
Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 127 of 129

Ministry of Tourism,
Culture and Sport

Ministère du Tourisme,
de la Culture et du Sport

Minister

Ministre

th

9 Floor, Hearst Block
900 Bay Street
Toronto ON M7A 2E1
Tel.
(416) 326-9326
Fax:
(416) 326-9338

e

9 étage, édifice Hearst
900, rue Bay
Toronto ON M7A 2E1
Tél. :
416 326-9326
Téléc. : 416 326-9338

January 20, 2017
Onorio Colucci
Chief Administrative Officer
The City of Windsor
350 City Hall Square West
Windsor, ON N9A 6S1
ocolucci@citywindsor.ca
Dear Mr. Colucci:
I am pleased to inform you that The City of Windsor’s application to the Ontario150
Community Celebration Program has been approved. The Government of Ontario,
through the Ministry of Tourism, Culture and Sport, will provide The City of Windsor with
up to $55,000 over fiscal year 2016-17 and/or fiscal year 2017-18 to support the Open
Streets Windsor: Ontario150 Edition initiative, subject to the execution of a transfer
payment agreement, including confirmation of the project budget.
2017 marks a once-in-a-generation chance to celebrate who we are and share our
dreams for the next 150 years. This celebratory year will be a time of excitement and
inspiration and it will be a chance for the province, as a founding member and leader in
Confederation, to engage all Ontarians and play a leading role in commemorating and
celebrating the 150th anniversary.
We are proud to support 367 initiatives across the province through the Ontario150
Community Celebration Program. Congratulations, and please accept my best wishes
for a successful initiative.
You will be contacted by a ministry regional advisor regarding funding and next steps,
including the signing of a Contribution Agreement.
All my best,

Eleanor McMahon
Minister
c:

Michael Cooke, Manager, Planning Policy, The City of Windsor

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 128 of 129

COUNCIL AGENDA - February 6, 2017
Page 129 of 129

